CHAPTER 12
Stream Processing

A complex system that works is invariably found to have evolved from a simple system that
works. The inverse proposition also appears to be true: A complex system designed from
scratch never works and cannot be made to work.
—John Gall, Systemantics (1975)
In Chapter 11 we discussed batch processing—techniques that read a set of files as
input and produce a new set of output files. The output is a form of derived data; that
is, a dataset that can be re-created by running the batch process again if necessary.
We saw how this simple but powerful idea can be used to create search indexes,
recommendation systems, analytics, and more.
However, one big assumption remained throughout Chapter 11: namely, that the
input is bounded—of a known and finite size—so the batch process knows when it
has finished reading its input. For example, the sorting operation that is central to
MapReduce must read its entire input before it can start producing output because
the very last input record could be the one with the lowest key that thus needs to be
the very first output record, so starting the output early is not an option.
In reality, a lot of data is unbounded because it arrives gradually over time. Your users
produced data yesterday and today, and they will continue to produce more data
tomorrow. Unless you go out of business, this process never ends, so the dataset is
never “complete” in any meaningful way [1]. Thus, batch processors must artificially
divide the data into chunks of fixed duration—for example, processing a day’s worth
of data at the end of every day, or processing an hour’s worth of data at the end of
every hour.
The problem with daily batch processes is that changes in the input are reflected in
the output a day later, which is too slow for many impatient users. To reduce the
delay, we can run the processing more frequently—say, processing a second’s worth

487

of data at the end of every second—or even continuously, abandoning the fixed time
slices entirely and simply processing every event as it happens. That is the idea behind
stream processing.
In general, a stream refers to data that is incrementally made available over time.
The concept appears in many places: in the stdin and stdout of Unix, programming
languages (lazy lists) [2], filesystem APIs (such as Java’s FileInputStream), TCP
connections, audio and video delivered over the internet, and so on.
In this chapter we will look at event streams as a data management mechanism: the
unbounded, incrementally processed counterpart to the batch data we saw in the
preceding chapter. We will first discuss how streams are represented, stored, and
transmitted over a network, then investigate the relationship between streams and
databases. Finally, in “Processing Streams” on page 513, we will explore approaches
and tools for processing those streams continually and ways that they can be used to
build applications.
Transmitting Event Streams
In the batch processing world, the inputs and outputs of a job are files (perhaps on a
distributed filesystem). What does the streaming equivalent look like?
When the input is a file (a sequence of bytes), the first processing step is usually
to parse it into a sequence of records. In a stream processing context, a record is

more commonly known as an event, but it is essentially the same thing: a small, self-
contained, immutable object containing the details of something that happened at a

point in time. An event usually contains a timestamp indicating when it happened
according to a time-of-day clock (see “Monotonic Versus Time-of-Day Clocks” on
page 359).
For example, the thing that happened might be an action that a user took, such as
viewing a page or making a purchase. It might also originate from a machine, such
as a periodic measurement from a temperature sensor or a CPU utilization metric. In
the example in “Batch Processing with Unix Tools” on page 454, each line of the web
server log is an event.
An event may be encoded as a text string, or JSON, or perhaps in a binary form, as
discussed in Chapter 5. This encoding allows you to store an event—for example, by
appending it to a file, inserting it into a relational table, or writing it to a document
database. The encoding also allows you to send the event over the network to another
node in order to process it.
In batch processing, a file is written once and then potentially read by multiple jobs.
Analogously, in streaming terminology, an event is generated once by a producer (also
known as a publisher or sender) and then potentially processed by multiple consumers

488 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

(subscribers or recipients) [3]. In a filesystem, a filename identifies a set of related
records; in a streaming system, related events are usually grouped together into a
topic or stream.
In principle, a file or database is sufficient to connect producers and consumers. A
producer writes every event that it generates to the datastore, and each consumer
periodically polls the datastore to check for events that have appeared since it last ran.
This is essentially what a batch process does when it processes a day’s worth of data at
the end of every day.
However, when moving toward continual processing with low delays, polling
becomes expensive if the datastore is not designed for this kind of usage. The more
often you poll, the lower the percentage of requests that return new events, and thus
the higher the overheads become. Instead, it is better for consumers to be notified
when new events appear.
Databases have traditionally not supported this kind of notification mechanism very
well. Relational databases commonly have triggers, which can react to a change (e.g.,
a row being inserted into a table), but they are very limited in what they can do and
have been somewhat of an afterthought in database design [4]. Instead, specialized
tools have been developed for the purpose of delivering event notifications.
Messaging Systems
A common approach for notifying consumers about new events is to use a messaging
system: a producer sends a message containing the event, which is then pushed to
consumers. We touched on these systems previously in “Event-Driven Architectures”
on page 189 and we will now go into more detail.
A direct communication channel like a Unix pipe or TCP connection between pro‐
ducer and consumer would be a simple way of implementing a messaging system.
However, most messaging systems expand on this basic model. In particular, Unix
pipes and TCP connect exactly one sender with one recipient, whereas a messaging
system allows multiple producer nodes to send messages to the same topic and allows
multiple consumer nodes to receive messages in a topic.
Within this publish/subscribe model, different systems take a wide range of
approaches, and there is no one right answer for all purposes. To differentiate the
systems, it is particularly helpful to ask the following two questions:
What happens if the producers send messages faster than the consumers can process
them?
Broadly speaking, the system has three options: drop messages, buffer messages
in a queue, or apply backpressure (also known as flow control, which blocks the
producer from sending more messages). For example, Unix pipes and TCP use
backpressure; they have a small fixed-size buffer, and if it fills up, the sender is
Transmitting Event Streams | 489

blocked until the recipient takes data out of the buffer (see “Network congestion
and queueing” on page 353).
If messages are buffered in a queue, it is important to understand what happens
as that queue grows. Does the system crash if the queue no longer fits in memory,
or does it write messages to disk? In the latter case, how does the disk access
affect the performance of the messaging system [5], and what happens when the
disk fills up [6]?
What happens if nodes crash or temporarily go offline—are any messages lost?
As with databases, durability may require a combination of writing to disk
and/or replication (see the sidebar “Replication and Durability” on page 283),
which has a cost. If you can afford to sometimes lose messages, you can probably
get higher throughput and lower latency on the same hardware.
Whether message loss is acceptable depends very much on the application. For exam‐
ple, with sensor readings and metrics that are transmitted periodically, an occasional
missing data point is perhaps not important, since an updated value will be sent a
short time later anyway. However, beware that if a large number of messages are
dropped, it may not be immediately apparent that the metrics are incorrect [7]. If you
are counting events, it is more important that they are delivered reliably, since every
lost message means incorrect counters.
A nice property of the batch processing systems we explored in Chapter 11 is that
they provide a strong reliability guarantee. Failed tasks are automatically retried, and
partial output from failed tasks is automatically discarded. This means the output
is the same as if no failures had occurred, which helps simplify the programming
model. Later in this chapter we will examine how we can provide similar guarantees
in a streaming context.
Direct messaging from producers to consumers
A number of messaging systems use direct network communication between produc‐
ers and consumers without using intermediary nodes:
• UDP multicast is widely used in the financial industry for streams such as
stock market feeds, where low latency is important [8]. Although UDP itself
is unreliable, application-level protocols can recover lost packets (the producer
must remember packets it has sent so that it can retransmit them on demand).
• Brokerless messaging libraries such as ZeroMQ and nanomsg take a similar
approach, implementing publish/subscribe messaging over TCP or IP multicast.

490 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

• Some metrics collection agents, such as StatsD [9], use unreliable UDP messag‐
ing to collect metrics from all machines on the network and monitor them. (In
the StatsD protocol, counter metrics are correct only if all messages are received;
using UDP makes the metrics at best approximate [10]. See also “TCP Versus
UDP” on page 354.)
• If the consumer exposes a service on the network, producers can make a direct
HTTP or RPC request (see “Dataflow Through Services: REST and RPC” on page
180) to push messages to the consumer. This is the idea behind webhooks [11], a
pattern in which a callback URL of one service is registered with another service,
and it makes a request to that URL whenever an event occurs.
Although these direct messaging systems work well in the situations for which they
are designed, they generally require the application code to be aware of the possibility
of message loss. The faults they can tolerate are quite limited. Even if the protocols
detect and retransmit packets that are lost in the network, they generally assume that
producers and consumers are constantly online.
If a consumer is offline, it may miss messages that were sent while it is unreacha‐
ble. Some protocols allow the producer to retry failed message deliveries, but this
approach may break down if the producer crashes, losing the buffer of messages that
it was supposed to retry.
Message brokers
A widely used alternative is to send messages via a message broker (also known as a
message queue), which is essentially a kind of database that is optimized for handling
message streams [12]. It runs as a server, with producers and consumers connecting
to it as clients. Producers write messages to the broker, and the broker delivers them
to consumers.
By centralizing the data in the broker, these systems can more easily tolerate clients
that come and go (connect, disconnect, and crash), and the question of durability is
moved to the broker instead. Some message brokers only keep messages in memory,
while others (depending on configuration) write them to disk so that they are not
lost in case of a broker crash. Faced with slow consumers, they generally allow
unbounded queueing (as opposed to dropping messages or backpressure), although
this choice may also depend on the configuration.
A consequence of queueing is that consumers are generally asynchronous. When a
producer sends a message, it normally waits only for the broker to confirm that
it has buffered the message and does not wait for the message to be processed by
consumers. The delivery to consumers will happen at an undetermined future point
in time—often within a fraction of a second, but sometimes significantly later if there
is a queue backlog.

Transmitting Event Streams | 491

Message brokers compared to databases
Some message brokers can even participate in two-phase commit protocols using XA
or JTA (see “Distributed Transactions Across Different Systems” on page 328). This
feature makes them quite similar in nature to databases, although message brokers
and databases still have important practical differences:
• Databases usually keep data until it is explicitly deleted, whereas some message
brokers automatically delete a message when it has been successfully delivered to
its consumers. Such message brokers are not suitable for long-term data storage.
• Since they quickly delete messages, most message brokers assume that their
working set is fairly small—that is, the queues are short. If the broker needs
to buffer a lot of messages because the consumers are slow (perhaps spilling
messages to disk if they no longer fit in memory), each individual message takes
longer to process, and the overall throughput may degrade [5].
• Databases often support secondary indexes and various ways of searching for
data with a query language, while message brokers often support some way of
subscribing to a subset of topics matching a pattern. Both are essentially ways for
a client to select the portion of the data that it wants to know about, but databases
typically offer much more advanced query functionality.
• When querying a database, the result is typically based on a point-in-time
snapshot of the data. If another client subsequently writes something to the
database that changes the query result, the first client does not find out that its
prior result is now outdated (unless it repeats the query or polls for changes).
By contrast, message brokers do not support arbitrary queries and don’t allow
message updates after they’re sent, but they do notify clients when data changes
(i.e., when new messages become available).
This is the traditional view of message brokers, which is encapsulated in stand‐
ards like JMS [13] and AMQP [14] and implemented in software like RabbitMQ,
ActiveMQ, HornetQ, Qpid, TIBCO Enterprise Message Service, IBM MQ, Azure
Service Bus, and Google Cloud Pub/Sub [15]. Although it is possible to use databases
as queues, tuning them to get good performance is not straightforward [16].
Multiple consumers
When multiple consumers read messages in the same topic, two main patterns of
messaging are used, as illustrated in Figure 12-1:
Load balancing
Each message is delivered to one of the consumers, so the consumers can share
the work of processing the messages in the topic. The broker may assign mes‐
sages to consumers arbitrarily. This pattern is useful when the messages are

492 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

expensive to process, so you want to be able to add consumers to parallelize
the processing. (In AMQP, you can implement load balancing by having multi‐
ple clients consuming from the same queue, and in JMS it is called a shared
subscription.)
Fan-out
Each message is delivered to all the consumers. Fan-out allows several independ‐
ent consumers to each “tune in” to the same broadcast of messages, without
affecting one another—the streaming equivalent of having several batch jobs that
read the same input file. (This feature is provided by topic subscriptions in JMS
and exchange bindings in AMQP.)

Figure 12-1. (a) Load balancing shares the work of consuming a topic among consumers;
(b) with fan-out, each message is delivered to multiple consumers.
The two patterns can be combined—for example, using Kafka’s consumer groups
feature. When a consumer group subscribes to a topic, each message in the topic
is sent to one of the consumers in the group (balancing load across the consumers
in the group). If two separate consumer groups subscribe to the same topic, each
message is sent to one consumer in each group (providing fan-out across consumer
groups).
Acknowledgments and redelivery
Consumers may crash at any time. Therefore, a broker could deliver a message
to a consumer but the consumer never processes it, or only partially processes it
before crashing. To ensure that the message is not lost, message brokers use acknowl‐
edgments: a client must explicitly tell the broker when it has finished processing a
message so that the broker can remove it from the queue.

Transmitting Event Streams | 493

If the connection to a client is closed or times out without the broker receiving an
acknowledgment, it assumes that the message was not processed, and therefore it
delivers the message again to another consumer. (Note that it could happen that
the message actually was fully processed, but the acknowledgment was lost in the
network. Handling this case requires an atomic commit protocol, as discussed in
“Exactly-once message processing” on page 329, unless the operation was idempotent
or exactly-once semantics are not required.)
When combined with load balancing, this redelivery behavior has an interesting
effect on the ordering of messages. In Figure 12-2, the consumers generally process
messages in the order they were sent by producers. However, consumer 2 crashes
while processing message m3, at the same time as consumer 1 is processing message
m4. The unacknowledged message m3 is subsequently redelivered to consumer 1,
with the result that consumer 1 processes messages in the order m4, m3, m5. Thus,
m3 and m4 are not delivered in the same order as they were sent by producer 1.

Figure 12-2. Consumer 2 crashes while processing m3, so it is redelivered to consumer 1
at a later time.
Even if the message broker otherwise tries to preserve the order of messages (as
required by both the JMS and AMQP standards), the combination of load balancing
with redelivery inevitably leads to messages being reordered. To avoid this issue, you
can use a separate queue per consumer (i.e., not use the load balancing feature).
Message reordering is not a problem if messages are completely independent of each
other, but it can be important if there are causal dependencies between messages, as
we shall see later in the chapter.

494 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

Redelivery can also result in wasted resources, resource starvation, or permanent
blockages in a stream. A common scenario is a producer that improperly serializes
a message—for example, by leaving out a required key in a JSON-encoded object. If
the message with the missing key causes a consumer to crash and restart, it won’t
acknowledge the message, so the broker will resend it, which will cause another
consumer to fail. This loop repeats itself indefinitely. If the broker guarantees strong
ordering, no further progress can be made. Brokers that allow message reordering
can continue to make progress, but they will waste resources on messages that will
never be acknowledged.
Dead letter queues (DLQs) are used to handle this problem. Rather than keeping the
message in the current queue and retrying forever, the message is moved to a differ‐
ent queue to unblock consumers [17, 18]. Monitoring is usually set up on DLQs—any
message in the queue is an error. Once a new message is detected, an operator can
decide to permanently drop it, manually modify and reproduce the message, or fix
consumer code to handle the message appropriately. DLQs are common in most
queuing systems, but log-based messaging systems such as Apache Pulsar and stream
processing systems such as Kafka Streams now support them as well [19].
Log-Based Message Brokers
Sending a packet over a network or making a request to a network service is normally
a transient operation that leaves no permanent trace. Although it is possible to record
such an operation permanently (using packet capture and logging), we normally
don’t think of it that way. AMQP/JMS-style message brokers inherited this transient
messaging mindset. Even though they may write messages to disk, they quickly delete
the messages again after they have been delivered to consumers.
Databases and filesystems take the opposite approach: everything that is written to
a database or file is normally expected to be permanently recorded, at least until
someone explicitly chooses to delete it again.
This difference in mindset has a big impact on how derived data is created. A key
feature of batch processes, as discussed in Chapter 11, is that you can run them
repeatedly, experimenting with the processing steps, without risk of damaging the
input (since the input is read-only). This is not the case with AMQP/JMS-style
messaging: receiving a message is destructive if the acknowledgment causes it to be
deleted from the broker, so you cannot run the same consumer again and expect to
get the same result.
If you add a new consumer to a messaging system, it typically starts receiving
messages sent only after the time it was registered; any prior messages are already
gone and cannot be recovered. Contrast this with files and databases, where you can
add a new client at any time, and it can read data written arbitrarily far in the past (as
long as it has not been explicitly overwritten or deleted by the application).
Transmitting Event Streams | 495

Why can we not have a hybrid, combining the durable storage approach of databases
with the low-latency notification facilities of messaging? This is the idea behind
log-based message brokers, which have become very popular in recent years.
Using logs for message storage
A log is simply an append-only sequence of records on disk. We previously discussed
logs in the context of log-structured storage engines and write-ahead logs in Chap‐
ter 4, in the context of replication in Chapter 6, and as a form of consensus in
Chapter 10.
The same structure can be used to implement a message broker. A producer sends a
message by appending it to the end of the log, and a consumer receives messages by
reading the log sequentially. If a consumer reaches the end of the log, it waits for a
notification that a new message has been appended. The Unix tool tail with the -f
option, which watches a file for data being appended, essentially works like this.
To scale to higher throughput than a single disk can offer, the log can be sharded (in
the sense of Chapter 7). Different shards can then be hosted on different machines,
making each shard a separate log that can be read and written independently from
other shards, and a topic can be defined as a group of shards that all carry messages
of the same type. This approach is illustrated in Figure 12-3.

Figure 12-3. Producers send messages by appending them to a topic partition file, and
consumers read these files sequentially.
Within each shard, which Kafka calls a partition, the broker assigns a monotonically
increasing sequence number, or offset, to every message (in Figure 12-3, the num‐
bers in boxes are message offsets). Such a sequence number makes sense because

496 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

a partition (shard) is append-only, so the messages within a partition are totally
ordered. There is no ordering guarantee across different partitions.
Apache Kafka [20] and Amazon Kinesis Streams are log-based message brokers
that work like this. Google Cloud Pub/Sub is architecturally similar but exposes a
JMS-style API rather than a log abstraction [15]. Even though these message brokers
write all messages to disk, they are able to achieve throughput of millions of messages
per second by sharding across multiple machines and to achieve fault tolerance by
replicating messages [21, 22].
Logs compared to traditional messaging
The log-based approach trivially supports fan-out messaging, because several con‐
sumers can independently read the log without affecting one another; reading a
message does not delete it from the log. To achieve load balancing across a group
of consumers, the broker can assign entire shards to nodes in the consumer group
instead of assigning individual messages to consumer clients.
Each client then consumes all the messages in the shards it has been assigned. Typi‐
cally, when a consumer has been assigned a log shard, it reads the messages in the
shard sequentially, in a straightforward single-threaded manner. This coarse-grained
load balancing approach has downsides:
• The number of nodes sharing the work of consuming a topic can be at most
the number of log shards in that topic, because messages within the same shard
are delivered to the same node. (It’s possible to create a load balancing scheme
in which two consumers share the work of processing a shard by having both
read the full set of messages but one of them consider only messages with
even-numbered offsets while the other deals with the odd-numbered offsets.
Alternatively, you could spread message processing over a thread pool, but that
approach complicates consumer offset management. In general, single-threaded
processing of a shard is preferable, and parallelism can be increased by using
more shards.)
• If a single message is slow to process, it holds up the processing of subsequent
messages in that shard (a form of head-of-line blocking; see “Describing Perfor‐
mance” on page 37).
Thus, when messages may be expensive to process and you want to parallelize pro‐
cessing on a message-by-message basis, and message ordering is not so important, the
JMS/AMQP style of message broker is preferable. On the other hand, in situations
with high message throughput, where each message is fast to process and message
ordering is important, the log-based approach works very well [23, 24]. However, the
distinction between the two architectures is being blurred since log-based messaging

Transmitting Event Streams | 497

systems such as Kafka now support JMS/AMQP-style consumer groups, which allow
multiple consumers to receive messages from the same partition [25, 26].
Since sharded logs typically preserve message ordering only within a single shard, all
messages that need to be consistently ordered need to be routed to the same shard.
For example, an application may require that the events relating to one particular user
appear in a fixed order. This can be achieved by choosing the shard for an event based
on the user ID of that event (in other words, making the user ID the partition key).
Consumer offsets
Consuming a shard sequentially makes it easy to tell which messages have already
been processed. All messages with an offset less than a consumer’s current offset have
been processed, and all messages with a greater offset have not yet been seen. Thus,
the broker does not need to track acknowledgments for every single message but
only to periodically record the consumer offsets. The reduced bookkeeping overhead
and the opportunities for batching and pipelining in this approach help increase
the throughput of log-based systems. If a consumer fails, however, it will resume from
the last recorded offset rather than the more recent last offset it saw. This can cause the
consumer to see some messages twice.
The offset is in fact very similar to the log sequence number that is commonly found
in single-leader database replication, and which we discussed in “Setting Up New
Followers” on page 201. In database replication, the log sequence number allows
a follower to reconnect to a leader after it has become disconnected and resume
replication without skipping any writes. Exactly the same principle is used here: the
message broker behaves like a leader database and the consumer like a follower.
If a consumer node fails, another node in the consumer group is assigned the failed
consumer’s shards, and it starts consuming messages at the last recorded offset. If
the consumer had processed subsequent messages but not yet recorded their offset,
those messages will be processed a second time upon restart. We will discuss ways of
dealing with this issue later in the chapter.
Disk space usage
If you only ever append to the log, you will eventually run out of disk space. To
reclaim disk space, the log is divided into segments, and from time to time old
segments are deleted or moved to archive storage. (We’ll discuss a more sophisticated
way of freeing disk space in “Log compaction” on page 505.)
This means that if a slow consumer cannot keep up with the rate of messages, and
it falls so far behind that its consumer offset points to a deleted segment, it will
miss some of the messages. Effectively, the log implements a bounded-size buffer that
discards old messages when it gets full, also known as a circular buffer or ring buffer.
However, since that buffer is on disk, it can be quite large.
498 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

Let’s do a back-of-the-envelope calculation. At the time of writing, a typical large
hard drive has a capacity of 20 TB and a sequential write throughput of 250 MB/s.
If you are writing messages at the fastest possible rate, it will take about 22 hours
until the drive is full and you need to start deleting the oldest messages. That means
a disk-based log can always buffer at least 22 hours’ worth of messages, even if you
have many disks with many machines (having more disks increases both the available
space and the total write bandwidth). In practice, deployments rarely use the full
write bandwidth of the disk, so the log can typically keep a buffer of several days’ or
even weeks’ worth of messages.
Many log-based message brokers now store messages in object storage to increase
their storage capacity, similarly to databases, as we saw in “Databases Backed by
Object Storage” on page 202. Message brokers such as Apache Kafka and Redpanda
serve older messages from object storage as part of their tiered storage. Others, such
as WarpStream, Confluent Freight, and Bufstream, store all their data in the object
store. In addition to cost efficiency, this architecture makes data integration easier:
messages in object storage are stored as Iceberg tables, which enable batch and data
warehouse job execution directly on the data without having to copy it into another
system.
When consumers cannot keep up with producers
At the beginning of “Messaging Systems” on page 489 we discussed three choices
of what to do if a consumer cannot keep up with the producer’s rate of sending
messages: dropping messages, buffering, or applying backpressure. In this taxonomy,
the log-based approach is a form of buffering with a large but fixed-size buffer
(limited by the available disk space).
If a consumer falls so far behind that the messages it requires are older than those
retained on disk, it will not be able to read those messages—so the broker effectively
drops old messages that go back further than the size of the buffer can accommodate.
You can monitor how far a consumer is behind the head of the log and raise an alert
if it falls behind significantly. As the buffer is large, there is enough time for a human
operator to fix the slow consumer and allow it to catch up before it starts missing
messages.
Even if a consumer does fall too far behind and starts missing messages, only that
consumer is affected; it does not disrupt the service for other consumers. This fact
is a big operational advantage. You can experimentally consume a production log for
development, testing, or debugging purposes, without having to worry much about
disrupting production services. When a consumer is shut down or crashes, it stops
consuming resources—the only thing that remains is its consumer offset.

Transmitting Event Streams | 499

This behavior contrasts with that of traditional message brokers, where you need to
be careful to delete any queues whose consumers have been shut down to avoid them
unnecessarily accumulating messages and taking away memory from active consumers.
Replaying old messages
We noted previously that with AMQP- and JMS-style message brokers, processing
and acknowledging messages is a destructive operation, since it causes the messages
to be deleted on the broker. On the other hand, in a log-based message broker,
consuming messages is more like reading from a file: it is a read-only operation that
does not change the log.
The only side effect of processing, besides any output of the consumer, is that the
consumer offset moves forward. But the offset is under the consumer’s control, so
it can easily be manipulated if necessary—for example, you can start a copy of a
consumer with yesterday’s offset and write the output to a different location in order
to reprocess the last day’s worth of messages. You can repeat this any number of
times, varying the processing code.
This aspect makes log-based messaging more like the batch processes discussed in the
previous chapter, where derived data is clearly separated from input data through a
repeatable transformation process. It allows more experimentation and easier recov‐
ery from errors and bugs, making it a good tool for integrating dataflows within an
organization [27].
Databases and Streams
We have drawn some comparisons between message brokers and databases. Even
though they have traditionally been considered separate categories of tools, we saw
that log-based message brokers have been successful in taking ideas from databases
and applying them to messaging. We can also do the opposite, taking ideas from
messaging and streams and applying them to databases.
One approach is to use an event stream as the system of record for storing data (see
“Systems of Record and Derived Data” on page 10). This is what happens in event
sourcing, which we discussed in “Event Sourcing and CQRS” on page 101. Instead of
storing data in a data model that is mutated by updating and deleting, you can model
every state change as an immutable event and write it to an append-only log. Any
read-optimized materialized views are derived from these events. Log-based message
brokers (configured to never delete old events) are well suited for event sourcing
since they use append-only storage, and they can notify consumers about new events
with low latency.
But you don’t have to go as far as adopting event sourcing; even with mutable data
models, event streams are useful for databases. In fact, every write to a database is an
500 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

event that can be captured, stored, and processed. The connection between databases
and streams runs deeper than just the physical storage of logs on disk—it is quite
fundamental.
For example, a replication log (see “Implementation of Replication Logs” on page
206) is a stream of database write events, produced by the leader as it processes
transactions. The followers apply that stream of writes to their own copy of the
database and thus end up with an accurate copy of the same data. The events in the
replication log describe the data changes that occurred.
We also came across the state machine replication principle in “Using shared logs”
on page 433, which states: if every event represents a write to the database, and every
replica processes the same events in the same order, then the replicas will all end
up in the same final state. (Processing an event is assumed to be a deterministic
operation.) It’s just another case of event streams!
In this section we will first look at a problem that arises in heterogeneous data
systems, then explore how we can solve it by bringing ideas from event streams to
databases.
Keeping Systems in Sync
As we have seen throughout this book, no single system can satisfy all data storage,
querying, and processing needs. In practice, most nontrivial applications need to
combine several technologies in order to satisfy their requirements—for example,
using an OLTP database to serve user requests, a cache to speed up common requests,
a full-text index to handle search queries, and a data warehouse for analytics. Each of
these has its own copy of the data, stored in its own representation that is optimized
for its own purposes.
As the same or related data appears in several places, they need to be kept in sync
with one another. If an item is updated in the database, it also needs to be updated in
the cache, search indexes, and data warehouse. With data warehouses, this synchroni‐
zation is usually performed by ETL processes (see “Data Warehousing” on page 7),
often by taking a full copy of a database, transforming it, and bulk-loading it into
the data warehouse—in other words, a batch process. Similarly, we saw in “Batch Use
Cases” on page 476 how search indexes, recommendation systems, and other derived
data systems might be created using batch processes.
If periodic full database dumps are too slow, an alternative that is sometimes used
is dual writes, in which the application code explicitly writes to each of the systems
when data changes—for example, first writing to the database, then updating the
search index, then invalidating the cache entries (or even performing those writes
concurrently).

Databases and Streams | 501

However, dual writes have serious problems, one of which is a race condition illustra‐
ted in Figure 12-4. In this example, two clients concurrently want to update an item
X. Client 1 wants to set the value to A, and client 2 wants to set it to B. Both clients
first write the new value to the database, then write it to the search index. Because
of unlucky timing, the requests are interleaved. The database first sees the write from
client 1 setting the value to A, then the write from client 2 setting the value to B, so
the final value in the database is B. The search index first sees the write from client
2, then client 1, so the final value in the search index is A. The two systems are now
permanently inconsistent with each other, even though no error occurred.

Figure 12-4. In the database, X is first set to A and then to B, while at the search index
the writes arrive in the opposite order.
Unless you have an additional concurrency detection mechanism, such as the version
vectors we discussed in “Detecting Concurrent Writes” on page 237, you will not
even notice that concurrent writes occurred. One value will simply silently overwrite
another value.
Another problem with dual writes is that one of the writes may fail while the other
succeeds. This is a fault-tolerance problem rather than a concurrency problem, but
it also has the effect of the two systems becoming inconsistent with each other.
Ensuring that they either both succeed or both fail is a case of the atomic commit
problem, which is expensive to solve (see “Two-Phase Commit” on page 324).
If you have only one replicated database with a single leader, that leader determines
the order of writes, so the state machine replication approach works among replicas
of the database. However, in Figure 12-4 there isn’t a single leader. The database may
have a leader and the search index may have a leader, but neither follows the other, so
conflicts can occur (see “Multi-Leader Replication” on page 215).
The situation would be better if there really was only one leader—for example, the
database—and if we could make the search index a follower of the database. But is
this possible in practice?
502 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

Change Data Capture
The problem with most databases’ replication logs is that they have long been consid‐
ered to be an internal implementation detail of the database, not a public API. Clients
are supposed to query the database through its data model and query language, not
parse the replication logs and try to extract data from them.
For decades, many databases simply did not have a documented way of getting the log
of changes written to them. This made it difficult to take all the changes made in a
database and replicate them to a different storage technology, such as a search index,
cache, or data warehouse.
More recently, there has been growing interest in change data capture (CDC), which
is the process of observing all data changes written to a database and extracting them
in a form in which they can be replicated to other systems [28]. CDC is especially
interesting if changes are made available as a stream, immediately as they are written.
For example, you can capture the changes in a database and continually apply the
same changes to a search index. If the log of changes is applied in the same order, you
can expect the data in the search index to match the data in the database. The search
index and any other derived data systems are just consumers of the change stream.
Figure 12-5 shows how the concurrency problem of Figure 12-4 is solved with CDC.
Even though the two requests to set X to A and B, respectively, arrive concurrently
at the database, the database decides on the order in which to execute them and
writes them to its replication log in that order. The search index picks them up and
applies them in the same order. If you need the data in another system, such as a data
warehouse, you can simply add it as another consumer of the CDC event stream.

Figure 12-5. Taking changes committed to a database and propagating them to down‐
stream systems in the same order

Databases and Streams | 503

Implementing CDC
We can call the log consumers derived data systems, as discussed in “Systems of
Record and Derived Data” on page 10. The data stored in the search index and the
data warehouse is just another view onto the data in the system of record. CDC is
a mechanism for ensuring that all changes made to the system of record are also
reflected in the derived data systems so that the derived systems have an accurate
copy of the data.
Essentially, CDC makes one database the leader (the one from which the changes
are captured) and turns the others into followers. A log-based message broker is well
suited for transporting the change events from the source database to the derived
systems, since it preserves the ordering of messages (avoiding the reordering issue of
Figure 12-2).
Logical replication logs can be used to implement CDC (see “Logical (row-based)
log replication” on page 208), although it comes with challenges, such as handling
schema changes and properly modeling updates. The Debezium open source project
addresses these challenges. The project contains source connectors for MySQL, Post‐
greSQL, Oracle, SQL Server, Db2, Cassandra, and many other databases. These con‐
nectors attach to database replication logs and surface the changes in a standard event
schema. Messages can then be transformed and written to downstream databases.
The Kafka Connect framework offers CDC connectors for various databases as well.
Maxwell does something similar for MySQL by parsing the binlog [29], GoldenGate
provides similar facilities for Oracle, and pgcapture does the same for PostgreSQL.
Like message brokers, CDC is usually asynchronous: the system-of-record database
does not wait for a change to be applied to consumers before committing it. This
design has the operational advantage that adding a slow consumer does not affect the
system of record too much, but it has the downside that all the issues of replication
lag apply (see “Problems with Replication Lag” on page 209).
Initial snapshot
If you have the log of all changes that were ever made to a database, you can
reconstruct the entire state of the database by replaying the log. However, in many
cases, keeping all changes forever would require too much disk space, and replaying it
would take too long, so the log needs to be truncated.
Building a new full-text index, for example, requires a full copy of the entire database.
Applying only a log of recent changes would not be sufficient, since it would be
missing items that were not recently updated. Thus, if you don’t have the entire log
history, you need to start with a consistent snapshot, as discussed in “Setting Up New
Followers” on page 201.

504 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

The snapshot of the database must correspond to a known position or offset in the
change log, so that you know at which point to start applying changes after the
snapshot has been processed. Some CDC tools integrate this snapshot facility, while
others leave it as a manual operation. Debezium uses Netflix’s DBLog watermarking
algorithm to provide incremental snapshots [30, 31].
Log compaction
If you can keep only a limited amount of log history, you need to go through the
snapshot process every time you want to add a new derived data system. However, log
compaction provides a good alternative.
We discussed log compaction previously in “Log-Structured Storage” on page 118, in
the context of log-structured storage engines (see Figure 4-3 for an example). The
principle is simple: the storage engine periodically looks for log records with the same
key, throws away any duplicates, and keeps only the most recent update for each
key. This can make log segments much smaller, so segments may also be merged as
part of the compaction process, as shown in Figure 12-6. This process runs in the
background.

Figure 12-6. In this log of key-value pairs, the key is the ID of a cat video (mew,
purr, scratch, or yawn) and the value is the number of times it has been played; log
compaction retains only the most recent value for each key.
In a log-structured storage engine, an update with a special null value (a tombstone)
indicates that a key was deleted and causes it to be removed during log compaction.
But as long as a key is not overwritten or deleted, it stays in the log forever. The
disk space required for such a compacted log depends only on the current contents
of the database, not the number of writes that have ever occurred in the database.

Databases and Streams | 505

If the same key is frequently overwritten, previous values will eventually be garbage-
collected, and only the latest value will be retained.

The same idea works in the context of log-based message brokers and CDC. If the
CDC system is set up such that every change has a primary key, and every update for
a key replaces the previous value for that key, then it’s sufficient to keep just the most
recent write for a particular key.
Now, whenever you want to rebuild a derived data system such as a search index, you
can start a new consumer from offset 0 of the log-compacted topic and sequentially
scan over all messages in the log. The log is guaranteed to contain the most recent
value for every key in the database (and maybe some older values). In other words,
you can use it to obtain a full copy of the database contents without having to take
another snapshot of the CDC source database.
This log compaction feature is supported by Apache Kafka. As we shall see later in
this chapter, it allows the message broker to be used for durable storage, not just for
transient messaging.
API support for change streams
Most popular databases now expose change streams as a first-class interface, rather
than the retrofitted and reverse-engineered CDC efforts of the past. Relational data‐
bases such as MySQL and PostgreSQL typically send changes through the same repli‐
cation log they use for their own replicas. Most cloud vendors offer CDC solutions
for their products as well—for example, Datastream offers streaming data access for
Google Cloud’s relational databases and data warehouses.
Even eventually consistent, quorum-based databases such as Cassandra now support
CDC. As we saw in “Implementing Linearizable Systems” on page 411, clients must
persist writes to a majority of nodes before they’re considered visible. CDC support
for quorum writes is challenging because there’s no single source of truth to subscribe
to. Whether the data is visible depends on each reader’s consistency preferences.
Cassandra sidesteps this issue by exposing raw log segments for each node rather
than providing a single stream of mutations. Systems that wish to consume the data
must read the raw log segments for each node and decide how best to merge them
into a single stream (much as a quorum reader does) [32].
Kafka Connect [33] integrates CDC tools for a wide range of database systems with
Kafka. Once the stream of change events is in Kafka, it can be used to update derived
data systems such as search indexes as well as feed into stream processing systems, as
discussed later in this chapter.

506 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

CDC versus event sourcing
How does CDC compare to event sourcing? Similarly to CDC, event sourcing involves
storing all changes to the application state as a log of change events. The biggest
difference is that event sourcing applies the idea at a different level of abstraction:
• In CDC, the application uses the database in a mutable way, updating and
deleting records at will. The log of changes is extracted from the database at a
low level (e.g., by parsing the replication log), which ensures that the order of
writes extracted from the database matches the order in which they were actually
written, avoiding the race condition in Figure 12-4.
• In event sourcing, the application logic is explicitly built on the basis of immut‐
able events that are written to an event log. In this case, the event store is
append-only, and updates or deletes of events are discouraged or prohibited.
Events are designed to reflect things that happened at the application level rather
than low-level state changes.
Which one is better depends on your situation. Adopting event sourcing is a big
change for an application that is not already doing it; it has a number of pros and
cons, which we discussed in “Event Sourcing and CQRS” on page 101. In contrast,
CDC can be added to an existing database with minimal changes; the application
writing to the database might not even know that CDC is occurring.
Change Data Capture and Database Schemas

Though CDC appears easier to adopt than event sourcing, it comes with its own set
of challenges. In a microservices architecture, a database is typically accessed from
only one service. Other services interact with it through that service’s public API, but
they don’t normally access the database directly. This makes the database an internal
implementation detail of the service, allowing the developers to change its schema
without affecting the public API.
However, CDC systems typically use the upstream database’s schema when replicating
its data, which turns these schemas into public APIs that must be managed much
like the public API of the service. Removing a column in the database table will
break downstream consumers that depend on that field. Such challenges have always
existed with data pipelines, but they typically impacted only data warehouse ETL.
Since CDC is often implemented as a data stream, other production services might be
consumers. Breaking such consumers can cause a customer-facing outage [34]. Data
contracts are often used to prevent these breakages.
A common way to decouple internal from external schemas is to use the outbox
pattern. Outboxes are tables with their own schemas, which are exposed to the CDC
system rather than the internal domain model in the database [35, 36]. Developers
can then modify their internal schemas as they see fit while leaving their outbox
Databases and Streams | 507

tables untouched. This might look like a dual write—it is. However, outboxes avoid
the challenges we discussed in “Keeping Systems in Sync” on page 501 by keeping
both writes in the same system (the database). This design allows both writes to
appear in a single transaction.
Outboxes present a few trade-offs, though. Developers must still maintain the trans‐
formation between their internal and outbox schemas, which can be challenging.
An outbox also increases the amount of data that the database has to write to its
underlying storage, which might trigger performance problems.
As with CDC, replaying the event log allows you to reconstruct the current state of
the system. However, log compaction needs to be handled differently:
• A CDC event for the update of a record typically contains the entire new version
of the record, so the current value for a primary key is entirely determined by the
most recent event for that primary key, and log compaction can discard previous
events for the same key.
• On the other hand, with event sourcing, events are modeled at a higher level. An
event typically expresses the intent of a user action, not the mechanics of the state
update that occurred as a result of the action. In this case, later events typically do
not override prior events, so you need the full history of events to reconstruct the
final state. Log compaction is not possible in the same way.
Applications that use event sourcing typically have a mechanism for storing snap‐
shots of the current state that is derived from the log of events, so they don’t need to
repeatedly reprocess the full log. However, this is only a performance optimization to
speed up reads and recovery from crashes; the intention is that the system is able to
store all raw events forever and reprocess the full event log whenever required. We
discuss this assumption in “Limitations of immutability” on page 512.
State, Streams, and Immutability
We saw in Chapter 11 that batch processing benefits from the immutability of its
input files, so you can run experimental processing jobs on existing input files
without fear of damaging them. This principle of immutability is also what makes
event sourcing and CDC so powerful.
We normally think of databases as storing the current state of the application. This
representation is optimized for reads, and it is usually the most convenient for
serving queries. The nature of state is that it changes, so databases support updating
and deleting data as well as inserting it. How does this fit with immutability?
Whenever you have state that changes, that state is the result of the events that
mutated it over time. For example, your list of currently available seats is the result
508 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

of the reservations you have processed, the current account balance is the result of
the credits and debits on the account, and the response time graph for your web
server is an aggregation of the individual response times of all web requests that have
occurred.
No matter how the state changes, there was always a sequence of events that caused
those changes. Even as things are done and undone, the fact remains true that
those events occurred. The key idea is that mutable state and an append-only log of
immutable events do not contradict each other; they are two sides of the same coin.
The log of all changes, or changelog, represents the evolution of state over time.
If you are mathematically inclined, you might say that the application state is what
you get when you integrate an event stream over time, and a change stream is what
you get when you differentiate the state by time, as shown in Figure 12-7 [37, 38].
The analogy has limitations (e.g., the second derivative of state does not seem to be
meaningful), but it’s a useful starting point for thinking about data.

Figure 12-7. The relationship between the current application state and an event stream
If you store the changelog durably, that simply has the effect of making the state
reproducible. If you consider the log of events to be your system of record and any
mutable state as being derived from it, it becomes easier to reason about the flow of
data through a system. As Jim Gray and Andreas Reuter put it in 1992 [39]:
There is no fundamental need to keep a database at all; the log contains all the

information there is. The only reason for storing the database (i.e., the current end-of-
the-log) is performance of retrieval operations.

Log compaction is one way of bridging the distinction between log and database state.
Compacting retains only the latest version of each record and discards overwritten
versions.
Advantages of immutable events
Immutability in databases is an old idea. For example, accountants have been using
immutability for centuries in financial bookkeeping. When a transaction occurs, it
is recorded in an append-only ledger, which is essentially a log of events describing
money, goods, or services that have changed hands. The accounts, such as profit and
loss or the balance sheet, are derived from the transactions in the ledger by adding
them up [40].

Databases and Streams | 509

If a mistake is made, accountants don’t erase or change the incorrect transaction in
the ledger. Instead, they add another transaction that compensates for the mistake—
for example, refunding an incorrect charge. The incorrect transaction remains in
the ledger forever, because it might be important for auditing reasons. If incorrect
figures derived from the incorrect ledger have already been published, the figures for
the next accounting period include a correction. This process is entirely normal in
accounting [41].
Although such auditability is particularly important in financial systems, it is also
beneficial for many other systems that are not subject to such strict regulation. If you
accidentally deploy buggy code that writes bad data to a database, recovery is much
harder if the code is able to destructively overwrite data. With an append-only log
of immutable events, diagnosing what happened and recovering from the problem is
much easier. Similarly, customer service can use an audit log to diagnose customer
requests and complaints.
Immutable events also capture more information than just the current state. For
example, on a shopping website, a customer may add an item to their cart and then
remove it again. Although the second event cancels out the first event from the point
of view of order fulfillment, it may be useful to know for analytics purposes that
the customer was considering a particular item but then decided against it. Perhaps
they will choose to buy it in the future, or perhaps they found a substitute. This
information is recorded in an event log, but it would be lost in a database that deletes
items when they are removed from the cart.
Deriving several views from the same event log
By separating mutable state from the immutable event log, you can derive several
read-oriented representations from the same log of events. This works just like having
multiple consumers of a stream (Figure 12-5)—for example, the analytical database
Druid ingests directly from Kafka using this approach, and Kafka Connect sinks can
export data from Kafka to various databases and indexes [33].
Having an explicit translation step from an event log to a database makes it easier
to evolve your application over time. If you want to introduce a new feature that
presents your existing data in a new way, you can use the event log to build a separate
read-optimized view for the new feature and run it alongside the existing systems
without having to modify them. Running old and new systems side by side is often
easier than performing a complicated schema migration in an existing system. Once
readers have switched to the new system and the old system is no longer needed, you
can simply shut it down and reclaim its resources [42, 43].
We encountered this idea of writing data in one write-optimized form and then trans‐
lating it into different read-optimized representations as needed in “Event Sourcing

510 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

and CQRS” on page 101. This process doesn’t necessarily require event sourcing; you
can just as well build multiple materialized views from a stream of CDC events [44].
The traditional approach to database and schema design is based on the fallacy that
data must be written in the same form as it will be queried. Debates about normaliza‐
tion and denormalization (see “Normalization, Denormalization, and Joins” on page
72) become largely irrelevant if you can translate data from a write-optimized event
log to read-optimized application state. It is entirely reasonable to denormalize data
in the read-optimized views, as the translation process gives you a mechanism for
keeping it consistent with the event log.
In “Case Study: Social Network Home Timelines” on page 34 we discussed a social
network’s home timelines, a cache of recent posts by the people a particular user is
following (like a mailbox). This is another example of read-optimized state: home
timelines are highly denormalized, since your posts are duplicated in all the timelines
of the people following you. However, the fan-out service keeps this duplicated state
in sync with new posts and new following relationships, which keeps the duplication
manageable.
Concurrency control
The biggest downside of CQRS is that the consumers of the event log are usually
asynchronous, so a user could make a write to the log, then read from a derived view
and find that their write has not yet been reflected in the view. We discussed this
problem and potential solutions in “Reading your own writes” on page 210.
One solution would be to perform the updates of the read view synchronously with
appending the event to the log. This requires either a distributed transaction across
the event log and the derived view, or some way of waiting until an event has been
reflected in the view. Both approaches are usually impractical, so views are normally
updated asynchronously.
On the other hand, deriving the current state from an event log also simplifies some
aspects of concurrency control. Much of the need for multi-object transactions (see
“Single-Object and Multi-Object Operations” on page 284) stems from a single user
action requiring data to be changed in several places. With event sourcing, you can
design an event such that it is a self-contained description of a user action. The user
action then requires only a single write in one place—namely, appending the event to
the log—which is easy to make atomic.
If the event log and the application state are sharded in the same way (e.g., processing
an event for a customer in shard 3 requires updating only shard 3 of the application
state), then a straightforward single-threaded log consumer needs no concurrency
control for writes. By construction, it processes only a single event at a time (see
“Actual Serial Execution” on page 309). The log removes the nondeterminism of

Databases and Streams | 511

concurrency by defining a serial order of events in a shard [27]. If an event touches
multiple state shards, a bit more work is required, which we’ll discuss in Chapter 13.
Many systems that don’t use an event-sourced model nevertheless rely on immut‐
ability for concurrency control. Various databases internally use immutable data
structures or multiversion data to support point-in-time snapshots (see “Indexes and
snapshot isolation” on page 298). Version control systems such as Git, Mercurial, and
Fossil also rely on immutable data to preserve version history of files.
Limitations of immutability
To what extent is it feasible to keep an immutable history of all changes forever?
The answer depends on the amount of churn in the dataset. Some workloads mostly
add data and rarely update or delete; they are easy to make immutable. Other work‐
loads have a high rate of updates and deletes on a comparatively small dataset; in
these cases, the immutable history may grow prohibitively large, fragmentation may
become an issue, and the performance of compaction and garbage collection becomes
crucial for operational robustness [45, 46].
Besides the performance reasons, you may also need data to be deleted for admin‐
istrative or legal reasons, in spite of all immutability. For example, privacy regula‐
tions such as the GDPR require that a user’s personal information be deleted and
erroneous information be removed on demand, or an accidental leak of sensitive
information may need to be contained.
In these circumstances, it’s not sufficient to just append another event to the log
to indicate that the prior data should be considered deleted—you actually want to
rewrite history and pretend that the data was never written in the first place. For
example, Datomic calls this feature excision [47], and the Fossil version control
system has a similar concept called shunning [48].
Truly deleting data is surprisingly hard [49], since copies can live in many places.
Storage engines, filesystems, and SSDs often write to a new location rather than
overwriting data in place [41], and backups are often deliberately immutable to
prevent accidental deletion or corruption.
One way of enabling deletion of immutable data is crypto-shredding [50]. Data that
you may want to delete in the future is stored encrypted, and when you want to get
rid of it, you forget the encryption key. The encrypted data is then still there, but
nobody can use it.
In a sense, this only moves the problem around; the actual data is still immutable,
but your key storage is mutable. Moreover, you have to decide up front which data
is going to be encrypted with the same key, and when you are going to use different
keys—an important decision, since you can later crypto-shred either all or none of
the data encrypted with a particular key, but not some of it. Storing a separate key
512 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

for every single data item would get too unwieldy, as the key storage would get as
big as the primary data storage. More sophisticated schemes, such as puncturable
encryption [51], make it possible to selectively revoke a key’s decryption abilities, but
they are not yet widely used.
Overall, deletion is more a matter of “making it harder to retrieve the data” than
actually “making it impossible to retrieve the data.” Nevertheless, you sometimes have
to try, as we shall see in “Legislation and Self-Regulation” on page 596.
Processing Streams
So far in this chapter we have talked about where streams come from (user activity
events, sensors, and writes to databases) and how streams are transported (through
direct messaging, via message brokers, and in event logs).
What remains is to discuss what you can do with the stream once you have it—
namely, you can process it. Broadly, you have three options:
1. You can take the data in the events and write it to a database, cache, search
index, or similar storage system, from where it can then be queried by other
clients. As shown in Figure 12-5, this is a good way of keeping a database in sync
with changes happening in other parts of the system—especially if the stream
consumer is the only client writing to the database. Writing to a storage system is
the streaming equivalent of what we discussed in “Batch Use Cases” on page 476.
2. You can push the events to users in some way—for example, by sending email
alerts or push notifications, or by streaming the events to a real-time dashboard
where they are visualized. In this case, a human is the ultimate consumer of the
stream.
3. You can process one or more input streams to produce one or more output
streams. Streams may go through a pipeline consisting of several such processing
stages before they eventually end up at an output (option 1 or 2).
In the rest of this chapter, we will discuss option 3: processing streams to produce
other derived streams. A piece of code that processes streams like this is known as
an operator or a job. It is closely related to the Unix processes and MapReduce jobs
we discussed in Chapter 11, and the pattern of dataflow is similar: a stream processor
consumes input streams in a read-only fashion and writes its output to a different
location in an append-only fashion.
The patterns for sharding and parallelization in stream processors are also very
similar to those in MapReduce and the dataflow engines we saw in Chapter 11, so we
won’t repeat those topics here. Basic mapping operations such as transforming and
filtering records also work the same.

Processing Streams | 513

The one crucial difference from batch jobs is that a stream never ends. This difference
has many implications. As discussed at the start of this chapter, sorting does not make
sense with an unbounded dataset, so sort-merge joins (see “Joins and Grouping”
on page 471) cannot be used. Fault-tolerance mechanisms must also change. With
a batch job that has been running for a few minutes, a failed task can simply be
restarted from the beginning, but with a stream job that has been running for several
years, restarting from the beginning after a crash may not be a viable option.
Uses of Stream Processing
Stream processing has long been used for monitoring purposes, where an organiza‐
tion wants to be alerted if certain things happen. For example:
• Fraud detection systems need to determine if the usage patterns of a credit card
have unexpectedly changed and block the card if it is likely to have been stolen.
• Trading systems need to examine price changes in a financial market and execute
trades according to specified rules.
• Manufacturing systems need to monitor the status of machines in a factory and
quickly identify the problem if a malfunction occurs.
• Military and intelligence systems need to track the activities of a potential aggres‐
sor and raise the alarm at any signs of an attack.
These kinds of applications require quite sophisticated pattern matching and correla‐
tions. However, other uses of stream processing have also emerged over time. In this
section we will briefly compare and contrast some of these applications.
Complex event processing
Complex event processing (CEP) is an approach developed in the 1990s for analyzing
event streams, especially geared toward the kind of application that requires search‐
ing for certain event patterns [52]. Similarly to the way that a regular expression
allows you to search for certain patterns of characters in a string, CEP allows you to
specify rules to search for certain patterns of events in a stream.
CEP systems often use a high-level declarative query language like SQL, or a GUI, to
describe the patterns of events that should be detected. These queries are submitted
to a processing engine that consumes the input streams and internally maintains
a state machine that performs the required matching. When a match is found, the
engine emits a complex event (hence the name) with the details of the event pattern
that was detected [53].
In these systems, the relationship between queries and data is reversed compared to
normal databases. Usually, a database stores data persistently and treats queries as
transient. When a query comes in, the database searches for data matching the query,
514 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

and it forgets about the query when it has finished. CEP engines reverse these roles.
Queries are stored long-term; as each event arrives, the engine checks whether it has
now seen an event pattern that matches any of its standing queries [54].
Implementations of CEP include Esper, Apama, and TIBCO StreamBase. Distributed
stream processors like Flink and Spark Streaming also have SQL support for declara‐
tive queries on streams.
Stream analytics
Stream processing is also used for analytics on streams. The boundary between CEP
and stream analytics is blurry, but as a general rule, stream analytics is less focused
on detecting specific event sequences and more oriented toward aggregations and
statistical metrics over a large volumes of events. Example applications include the
following:
• Measuring the rate of a certain type of event (how often it occurs per time
interval)
• Calculating the rolling average of a value over a time period
• Comparing current statistics to previous time intervals (e.g., to detect trends or
to alert on metrics that are unusually high or low compared to the same time last
week)
Such statistics are usually computed over fixed time intervals—for example, you
might want to know the average number of queries per second to a service over
the last five minutes and their 99th percentile response time during that period.
Averaging over a few minutes smooths out irrelevant fluctuations from one second
to the next, while still giving you a timely picture of any changes in traffic patterns.
The time interval over which you aggregate is known as a window; we will look into
windowing in more detail in “Reasoning About Time” on page 518.
Stream analytics systems sometimes use probabilistic algorithms, such as Bloom
filters (which we encountered in “Bloom filters” on page 122) for set membership,
HyperLogLog [55] for cardinality estimation, and various percentile estimation algo‐
rithms (see “Computing Percentiles” on page 42). Probabilistic algorithms produce
approximate results but have the advantage of requiring significantly less memory in
the stream processor than exact algorithms. This use of approximation algorithms
sometimes leads people to believe that stream processing systems are always lossy
and inexact, but that is wrong. There is nothing inherently approximate about stream
processing, and using probabilistic algorithms is merely an optimization [56].
Many open source distributed stream processing frameworks, such as Apache Storm,
Spark Streaming, Flink, Samza, Apache Beam, and Kafka Streams, are designed with

Processing Streams | 515

analytics in mind [57]. Hosted services include Google Cloud Dataflow and Azure
Stream Analytics.
Maintaining materialized views
We saw that a stream of changes to a database can be used to keep derived data
systems, such as caches, search indexes, and data warehouses, up-to-date with a
source database. These are examples of maintaining materialized views: deriving an
alternative view onto a dataset so that you can query it efficiently, and updating that
view whenever the underlying data changes [37].
Similarly, in event sourcing, application state is maintained by applying a log of
events; here, the application state is also a kind of materialized view. Unlike stream
analytics scenarios, considering only events within a certain time window is usually
not sufficient. Building the materialized view potentially requires all events over an
arbitrary time period, apart from any obsolete events that may be discarded by log
compaction. In effect, you need a window that stretches all the way back to the
beginning of time.
In principle, any stream processor could be used for materialized view maintenance,
although the need to maintain events forever runs counter to the assumptions of
some analytics-oriented frameworks that mostly operate on windows of a limited
duration. Kafka Streams and Confluent’s ksqlDB support this kind of usage, building
upon Kafka’s support for log compaction [58].

Incremental View Maintenance

Databases might seem well suited for materialized view maintenance; they are
designed to keep full copies of a dataset, after all. Many also support materialized
views. We saw in “Materialized Views and Data Cubes” on page 143 that analytical
queries typical of a data warehouse can be materialized into OLAP cubes.
Unfortunately, databases often refresh materialized view tables by using periodic
batch jobs or on-demand requests such as PostgreSQL’s REFRESH MATERIALIZED
VIEW, not on every update to source data. This approach has two significant draw‐
backs that make it inappropriate for stream processing view maintenance:
Poor efficiency
All data is reprocessed every time the view is updated, though most of the data
likely remains unchanged.
Data freshness
Changes in source data are not reflected in a materialized view until its query is
run again, during its next scheduled update.

516 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

It is possible to write database triggers that update materialized views efficiently
when the data is easily partitioned and the computation is naturally incremental. For
example, if a materialized view maintains total sales revenue per day, the row for
the appropriate day can be updated every time a new sale occurs. Bespoke solutions
work in a few cases, but many SQL queries can’t be easily or efficiently converted to
incremental computation.
Incremental view maintenance (IVM) is a more general solution to the problems
just described. IVM techniques convert queries written in SQL or other languages
into operators capable of incremental computations. Rather than processing entire
datasets, IVM algorithms recompute and update only data that has changed [38, 59,
60]. View computation then becomes far more efficient; this means updates can be
run much more frequently, which dramatically increases data freshness.
Databases such as Materialize [61], RisingWave, ClickHouse, and Feldera all use IVM
techniques to provide efficient incremental materialized views. These databases ingest
streams of events to expose materialized views in real time. Recent events are buf‐
fered in memory and periodically used to update on-disk materialized views. Reads
combine the recent events and the materialized data to provide a single real-time
view. Since reads are often expressed in SQL and materialized views are often stored
in OLAP-style formats, these systems also support large-scale data warehouse–style
queries such as those discussed in Chapter 11.
Search on streams
Besides CEP, which allows searching for patterns consisting of multiple events, there
is also sometimes a need to search for individual events based on complex criteria,
such as full-text search queries. For example, media monitoring services subscribe
to feeds of news articles and broadcasts from media outlets and search for any news
mentioning companies, products, or topics of interest. This is done by formulating
a search query in advance, then continually matching the stream of news items
against this query. Similar features exist on some websites—for example, users of real
estate sites can ask to be notified when a new property matching their search criteria
appears on the market. The percolator feature of Elasticsearch [62] is one option for
implementing this kind of stream search.
Conventional search engines first index the documents and then run queries over the
index. By contrast, searching a stream turns the processing on its head. The queries are
stored, and the documents are evaluated against them, as in CEP. In the simplest case,
you can test every document against every query, although this can be slow if you have
a large number of queries. To optimize the process, it is possible to index the queries as
well as the documents and thus narrow the set of queries that may match [63].

Processing Streams | 517

Event-driven architectures and RPC
In “Event-Driven Architectures” on page 189 we discussed message-passing systems
as an alternative to RPC. This mechanism for services to communicate is used, for
example, in the actor model.
Although these systems are also based on messages and events, we normally don’t
think of them as stream processors, for a few reasons:
• Actor frameworks are primarily a mechanism for managing concurrency and
distributed execution of communicating modules, whereas stream processing is
primarily a data management technique.
• Communication between actors is often ephemeral and one-to-one, whereas
event logs are durable and multi-subscriber.
• Actors can communicate in arbitrary ways (including cyclic request/response
patterns), but stream processors are usually set up in acyclic pipelines where

every stream is the output of one particular job and is derived from a well-
defined set of input streams.

That said, there is some crossover between RPC-like systems and stream processing.
For example, Apache Storm has a feature called distributed RPC, which allows user
queries to be farmed out to a set of nodes that also process event streams; these
queries are then interleaved with events from the input streams, and results can be
aggregated and sent back to the user.
It is also possible to process streams by using actor frameworks. However, many
such frameworks do not guarantee message delivery in the case of crashes, so the
processing is not fault-tolerant unless you implement additional retry logic.
Reasoning About Time
Stream processors often need to deal with time, especially when running analytics
tasks, which frequently use time windows such as “the average over the last five
minutes.” The meaning of “the last five minutes” might seem unambiguous and clear,
but unfortunately the notion is surprisingly tricky.
In a batch process, the processing tasks rapidly crunch through a large collection
of historical events. If some kind of breakdown by time needs to happen, the batch
process needs to look at the timestamp embedded in each event. There is no point in
looking at the system clock of the machine running the process, because the time at
which it is run has nothing to do with the time at which the events actually occurred.
A batch process may read a year’s worth of historical events within a few minutes;
in most cases, the timeline of interest is the year of history, not the few minutes of
processing. Moreover, using the timestamps in the events allows the processing to

518 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

be deterministic: running the same process again on the same input yields the same
result.
On the other hand, many stream processing frameworks use the local system clock
on the processing machine (the processing time) to determine windowing [64]. This
approach has the advantage of being simple, and it is reasonable if the delay between
event creation and event processing is negligibly short. However, it breaks down with
any significant processing lag (i.e., if the processing happens noticeably later than the
time that the event occurred).
Event time versus processing time
Processing may be delayed for many reasons, including queueing, network faults, a
performance issue leading to contention in the message broker or processor, a restart
of the stream consumer, or reprocessing of past events while recovering from a fault
or after fixing a bug in the code.
Message delays can also lead to unpredictable ordering of messages. For example, say
a user first makes one web request (which is handled by web server A), and then a
second request (which is handled by server B). A and B emit events describing the
requests they handled, but B’s event reaches the message broker before A’s event does.
Now stream processors will first see the B event and then the A event, even though
they occurred in the opposite order.
If it helps to have an analogy, consider the Star Wars movies. Episode IV was
released in 1977, Episode V in 1980, and Episode VI in 1983, followed by Episodes
I, II, and III in 1999, 2002, and 2005, respectively, and Episodes VII, VIII, and IX
in 2015, 2017, and 2019 [65]. If you watched the movies in the order they came
out, the order in which you processed them is inconsistent with the order of their
narrative. (The episode number is like the event timestamp, and the date when you
watched the movie is the processing time.) As humans, we are able to cope with such
discontinuities, but stream processing algorithms need to be specifically written to
accommodate these kinds of timing and ordering issues.
Confusing event time and processing time leads to bad data. For example, say you
have a stream processor that measures the rate of requests (counting the number of
requests per second). If you redeploy the stream processor, it may be shut down for
a minute and process the backlog of events when it comes back up. If you measure
the rate based on the processing time, it will look as if there was a sudden anomalous
spike of requests while processing the backlog, when in fact the real rate of requests
was steady (Figure 12-8).

Processing Streams | 519

Figure 12-8. Windowing by processing time introduces artifacts due to variations in
processing rate.
Handling straggler events
A tricky problem when defining windows in terms of event time is that you can never
be sure whether you have received all the events for a particular window or some are
still to come.
For example, say you’re grouping events into 1-minute windows so that you can
count the number of requests per minute. You have counted some number of events
with timestamps that fall in the 37th minute of the hour, and time has moved on; now
most of the incoming events fall within the 38th and 39th minutes of the hour. When
do you declare that you have finished the window for the 37th minute and output its
counter value?
You can time out and declare a window ready after you have not seen any new events
for that window in a while. However, some events could be buffered on another
machine somewhere, delayed by a network interruption. You need to be able to
handle such straggler events that arrive after the window has already been declared
complete. Broadly, you have two options [1]:
• Ignore the straggler events, as they are probably a small percentage of events in
normal circumstances. You can track the number of dropped events as a metric
and alert if you start dropping a significant amount of data.
• Publish a correction, an updated value for the window with stragglers included.
You may also need to retract the previous output.

520 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

In some cases it is possible to use a special message to indicate that “from now on,
there will be no more messages with a timestamp earlier than t,” which can be used
by consumers to trigger windows [66]. However, if several producers on different
machines are generating events, each with its own minimum timestamp thresholds,
the consumers need to keep track of each producer individually. Adding and removing
producers is trickier in this case.
Whose clock are you using, anyway?
Assigning timestamps to events is even more difficult when events can be buffered at
several points in the system. For example, consider a mobile app that reports events
for usage metrics to a server. The app may be used while the device is offline, in
which case it will buffer events locally on the device and send them to a server when
an internet connection is next available (which may be hours or even days later). To
any consumers of this stream, the events will appear as extremely delayed stragglers.
In this context, the timestamp on the events should really be the time that the user
interaction occurred, according to the mobile device’s local clock. However, the clock
on a user-controlled device often cannot be trusted, as it may be accidentally or
deliberately set to the wrong time (see “Clock Synchronization and Accuracy” on
page 360). The time that the event was received by the server (according to the
server’s clock) is more likely to be accurate, since the server is under your control, but
less meaningful in terms of describing the user interaction.
To adjust for incorrect device clocks, one approach is to log three timestamps [67]:
• The time that the event occurred, according to the device clock
• The time that the event was sent to the server, according to the device clock
• The time that the event was received by the server, according to the server clock
By subtracting the second timestamp from the third, you can estimate the offset
between the device clock and the server clock (assuming the network delay is negligi‐
ble compared to the required timestamp accuracy). You can then apply that offset
to the event timestamp, and thus estimate the true time that the event occurred
(assuming the device clock offset did not change between the time the event occurred
and the time it was sent to the server).
This problem is not unique to stream processing; batch processing suffers from
exactly the same issues of reasoning about time. It is just more noticeable in a
streaming context, where we are more aware of the passage of time.
Types of windows
Once you know how the timestamp of an event should be determined, the next step
is to decide how windows over time periods should be defined. The window can then
Processing Streams | 521

be used for aggregations—for example, to count events or to calculate the average of
values within the window. Several types of windows are in common use [64, 68]:
Tumbling windows
A tumbling window has a fixed length, and every event belongs to exactly one
window. For example, if you have a one-minute tumbling window, all the events
with timestamps from 10:03:00 to 10:03:59 are grouped into one window, events
from 10:04:00 to 10:04:59 into the next window, and so on. You could implement
a one-minute tumbling window by taking each event timestamp and rounding it
down to the nearest minute to determine the window that it belongs to.
Hopping windows
A hopping window also has a fixed length, but there is overlap between consec‐
utive windows to provide smoothing. For example, a five-minute window with
a hop size of one minute would contain the events from 10:03:00 to 10:07:59,
then the next window would cover events from 10:04:00 to 10:08:59, and so on.
You can implement this by first calculating one-minute tumbling windows, then
aggregating over several adjacent windows.
Sliding windows
A sliding window contains all the events that occur within a certain interval of
each other. For example, a five-minute sliding window would cover events at
10:03:39 and 10:08:12, because they are less than five minutes apart (note that
tumbling and hopping five-minute windows would not have put these two events
in the same window, as they use fixed boundaries). A sliding window can be
implemented by keeping a buffer of events sorted by time and removing old
events when they expire from the window.
Session windows
Unlike the other window types, a session window has no fixed duration. Instead,
it is defined by grouping together all events for the same user that occur closely
together in time, and the window ends when the user has been inactive for
some time (e.g., if no events have occurred for 30 minutes). Sessionization is a
common requirement for website analytics.
Window operations usually maintain temporary state. In some cases, the state is of a
fixed size, no matter how large the window or how many events occur—for example,
a counting operation will have only one counter regardless of the window size or
event count. On the other hand, sliding windows or stream joins, which we discuss in
the next section, require that events be buffered until the window finishes. Therefore,
large window sizes or high-throughput streams can cause stream processors to keep a
lot of temporary state. You must then take care to ensure that the machines running
stream processing tasks have enough capacity to maintain this state, whether in
memory or on disk.

522 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

Stream Joins
In “Joins and Grouping” on page 471 we discussed how batch jobs can join datasets
by key and how such joins form an important part of data pipelines. Since stream
processing generalizes data pipelines to incremental processing of unbounded data‐
sets, there is exactly the same need for joins on streams.
However, the fact that new events can appear at any time on a stream makes joins on
streams more challenging than in batch jobs. To understand the situation better, let’s
distinguish between three types of joins: stream–stream joins, stream–table joins, and
table–table joins. In the following sections we’ll illustrate each by example.
Stream–stream join (window join)
Say you have a search feature on your website, and you want to detect recent trends
in searched-for URLs. Every time someone types a search query, you log an event
containing the query and the results returned. Every time someone clicks one of

the search results, you log another event recording the click. To calculate the click-
through rate for each URL in the search results, you need to bring together the events

for the search action and the click action, which are connected by having the same
session ID. Similar analyses are needed in advertising systems [69].
The click may never come if the user abandons their search, and even if it comes,
the time between the search and the click may be highly variable. In many cases it
might be a few seconds, but it could be as long as days or weeks (if a user runs a
search, forgets about that browser tab, and then returns to the tab and clicks a result
sometime later). Because of variable network delays, the click event may even arrive
before the search event. You can choose a suitable window for the join—for example,
you may choose to join a click with a search if they occur at most one hour apart.
Note that embedding the details of the search in the click event is not equivalent
to joining the events. Doing so would tell you only about the cases where the user
clicked a search result, not about the searches where the user did not click any of the
results. To measure search quality, you need accurate click-through rates, for which
you need both the search events and the click events.
To implement this type of join, a stream processor needs to maintain state—for
example, all the events that occurred in the last hour, indexed by session ID. When‐
ever a search event or click event occurs, it is added to the appropriate index, and
the stream processor also checks the other index to see whether another event for
the same session ID has already arrived. If there is a matching event, you emit an
event saying which search result was clicked. If the search event expires without you
seeing a matching click event, you emit an event saying which search results were not
clicked.

Processing Streams | 523

Stream–table join (stream enrichment)
In “Joins and Grouping” on page 471 (Figure 11-2) we saw an example of a batch
job joining two datasets: a set of user activity events and a database of user profiles.
It is natural to think of the user activity events as a stream and to perform the
same join on a continuous basis in a stream processor. The input is a stream of
activity events containing a user ID, and the output is a stream of activity events in
which the user ID has been augmented with profile information about the user. This
process is sometimes known as enriching the activity events with information from
the database.
To perform this join, the stream process needs to take one activity event at a time,
look up the event’s user ID in the database, and add the profile information to the
activity event. The database lookup could be implemented by querying a remote
database; however, as discussed in “Joins and Grouping” on page 471, such remote
queries are likely to be slow and risk overloading the database [58].
Another approach is to load a copy of the database into the stream processor so that
it can be queried locally without a network round trip. This technique is called a hash
join since the local copy of the database might be an in-memory hash table if it is
small enough, or an index on the local disk.
The difference from batch jobs is that a batch job uses a point-in-time snapshot of the
database as input, whereas a stream processor is long-running, and the contents of
the database are likely to change over time, so the stream processor’s local copy of the
database needs to be kept up-to-date. This issue can be solved by CDC. The stream
processor can subscribe to a changelog of the user profile database as well as the
stream of activity events. When a profile is created or modified, the stream processor
updates its local copy. Thus, we obtain a join between two streams: the activity events
and the profile updates.
A stream–table join is very similar to a stream–stream join. The biggest difference is
that for the table changelog stream, the join uses a window that reaches back to the
“beginning of time” (a conceptually infinite window), with newer versions of records
overwriting older ones. For the stream input, the join might not maintain a window
at all.
Table–table join (materialized view maintenance)
Consider the social network timeline example that we discussed in “Case Study:
Social Network Home Timelines” on page 34. We said that when a user wants to
view their home timeline, it is too expensive to iterate over all the people the user is
following, find their recent posts, and merge them.

524 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

Instead, we want a timeline cache, a kind of per-user “inbox” to which posts are
written as they are sent, so that reading the timeline is a single lookup. Materializing
and maintaining this cache requires the following event processing:
• When user u sends a new post, it is added to the timeline of every user who is
following u.
• When a user deletes a post, or deletes their entire account, it is removed from all
users’ timelines.
• When user u1

starts following user u2

, recent posts by u2

are added to u1
• ’s
timeline.
• When user u1

unfollows user u2

, posts by u2

are removed from u1
• ’s timeline.
To implement this cache maintenance in a stream processor, you need streams of
events for posts (sending and deleting) and for follow relationships (following and
unfollowing). The stream process needs to maintain a database containing the set of
followers for each user so that it knows which timelines need to be updated when a
new post arrives.
Another way of looking at this stream process is that it maintains a materialized view
for a query that joins two tables (posts and follows)—something like the following:
SELECT follows.follower_id AS timeline_id,
array_agg(posts.* ORDER BY posts.timestamp DESC)
FROM posts
JOIN follows ON follows.followee_id = posts.sender_id
GROUP BY follows.follower_id
The join of the streams corresponds directly to the join of the tables in this query.
The timelines are effectively a cache of the result of the query, updated every time the
underlying tables change.

If you regard a stream as the derivative of a table, as in Figure 12-7,
and regard a join as a product of two tables u·v, something interest‐
ing happens: the stream of changes to the materialized join follows
the product rule (u·v)′ = u′v + uv′. Any change of posts is joined
with the current followers, and any change of follows is joined
with the current posts [37].

Time dependence of joins
The three types of joins described here (stream–stream, stream–table, and table–
table) have a lot in common. They all require the stream processor to maintain a state
(search and click events, user profiles, or follower list) derived from one join input
and to query that state when processing records from the other input.

Processing Streams | 525

The order of the events that maintain the state is important—for example, it matters
whether you first follow and then unfollow a user, or the other way round. In a
sharded event log like Kafka, the ordering of events within a single shard (partition)
is preserved, but there is typically no ordering guarantee across different streams or
shards.
This raises a question: if events on different streams happen around a similar time,
in which order are they processed? In the stream–table join example, for instance,
if a user updates their profile, which activity events are joined with the old profile
(processed before the profile update), and which are joined with the new profile
(processed after the profile update)? Put another way: if state changes over time, and
you join with a state, what point in time do you use for the join?
Such time dependence can occur in many places. For example, if you sell things, you
need to apply the right tax rate to invoices, which depends on the country or state,
the type of product, and the date of sale (since tax rates change from time to time).
When joining sales to a table of tax rates, you probably want to join with the tax rate
at the time of the sale, which may be different from the current tax rate if you are
reprocessing historical data.
If the ordering of events across streams is undetermined, the join becomes nondeter‐
ministic [70], which means you cannot rerun the same job on the same input and
necessarily get the same result. The events on the input streams may be interleaved in
a different way when you run the job again.
In data warehouses, this issue is known as a slowly changing dimension (SCD), and it
is often addressed by using a unique identifier for a particular version of the joined
record—for example, every time the tax rate changes, it is given a new identifier, and
the invoice includes the identifier for the tax rate at the time of sale [71, 72]. This
change makes the join deterministic, but it has the consequence that log compaction
is not possible, since all versions of the records in the table need to be retained. Alter‐
natively, you can denormalize the data and include the applicable tax rate directly in
every sale event.
Fault Tolerance
In the final section of this chapter, let’s consider how stream processors can tolerate
faults. We saw in Chapter 11 that batch processing frameworks can tolerate faults
fairly easily: if a task fails, it can simply be started again on another machine, and the
output of the failed task is discarded. This transparent retry is possible because input
files are immutable, each task writes its output to a separate file, and output is made
visible only when a task completes successfully.
In particular, the batch approach to fault tolerance ensures that the output of the
batch job is the same as if nothing had gone wrong, even if some tasks did fail. It

526 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

appears as though every input record was processed exactly once—no records are
skipped, and none are processed twice. Although restarting tasks means that records
may be processed multiple times, the visible effect in the output is as if they had
been processed only once. This principle is known as exactly-once semantics, although
effectively-once would be a more descriptive term [73].
The same issue of fault tolerance arises in stream processing, but it is less straightfor‐
ward to handle. Waiting until a task is finished before making its output visible is not
an option, because a stream is infinite, so you can never finish processing it.
Microbatching and checkpointing
One solution is to break the stream into small blocks and treat each block like a
miniature batch process. This approach is called microbatching, and it is used in
Spark Streaming [74]. The batch size is typically around one second, which is the
result of a performance compromise: smaller batches incur greater scheduling and
coordination overhead, while larger batches mean a longer delay before results of the
stream processor become visible.
Microbatching also implicitly provides a tumbling window equal to the batch size
(windowed by processing time, not event timestamps); any jobs that require larger
windows need to explicitly carry over state from one microbatch to the next.
A variant approach, used in Apache Flink, is to periodically generate rolling check‐
points of state and write them to durable storage [75, 76]. If a stream operator
crashes, it can restart from its most recent checkpoint and discard any output gener‐
ated between the last checkpoint and the crash. The checkpoints are triggered by
barriers in the message stream, similar to the boundaries between microbatches, but
without forcing a particular window size.
Within the confines of the stream processing framework, the microbatching and
checkpointing approaches provide the same exactly-once semantics as batch process‐
ing. However, as soon as output leaves the stream processor (e.g., when it writes to a
database, publishes messages to an external message broker, or triggers the sending of
emails), the framework is no longer able to discard the output of a failed microbatch.
In this case, restarting a failed task causes the external side effect to happen twice, and
microbatching or checkpointing alone is not sufficient to prevent this problem.
Atomic commit revisited
To give the appearance of exactly-once processing in the presence of faults, we need
to ensure that all outputs and side effects of processing an event persist if and
only if the processing is successful. That includes any messages sent to downstream
operators or external messaging systems (including email or push notifications),
database writes, changes to operator state, and acknowledgments of input messages
(including moving the consumer offset forward in a log-based message broker).
Processing Streams | 527

These actions must all happen atomically: either they all occur, or none of them do. If
this approach sounds familiar, that’s because we discussed it in “Exactly-once message
processing” on page 329 in the context of distributed transactions and two-phase
commit.
We considered the problems with the traditional implementations of distributed
transactions, such as XA, in Chapter 8. However, in more restricted environments
it is possible to implement such an atomic commit facility efficiently. This approach
is used in Google Cloud Dataflow [66, 75], VoltDB [77], and Apache Kafka [78,
79]. Unlike XA, these implementations do not attempt to provide transactions across
heterogeneous technologies, but instead keep the transactions internal by managing
both state changes and messaging within the stream processing framework. The
overhead of the transaction protocol can be amortized by processing several input
messages within a single transaction.
Idempotence
Our goal is to discard the partial output of any failed tasks so that they can be safely
retried. Distributed transactions are one way of achieving that goal; another is to rely
on idempotence, as we saw in “Durable Execution and Workflows” on page 187 [80].
An idempotent operation is one that you can perform multiple times, and it has
the same effect as if you performed it only once. For example, deleting a key in a
key-value store is idempotent (deleting the value again has no further effect), whereas
incrementing a counter is not idempotent (performing the increment again means
the value is incremented twice).
Even if an operation is not naturally idempotent, it can often be made idempotent
with a bit of extra metadata. For example, when consuming messages from Kafka,
every message has a persistent, monotonically increasing offset. When writing a value
to an external database, you can include the offset of the message that triggered the
last write with the value. Thus, you can tell whether an update has already been
applied and avoid performing the same update again. The state handling in Storm’s
Trident is based on a similar idea.
Relying on idempotence implies several assumptions: restarting a failed task must
replay the same messages in the same order (a log-based message broker does this),
the processing must be deterministic, and no other node may concurrently update
the same value [81, 82]. When failing over from one processing node to another,
fencing may be required (see “Distributed Locks and Leases” on page 373) to prevent
interference from a node that is thought to be dead but is actually alive. Despite

all those caveats, idempotent operations can be an effective way of achieving exactly-
once semantics with only a small overhead.

528 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

Rebuilding state after a failure
Any stream process that requires state—for example, windowed aggregations (such as
counters, averages, and histograms) and any tables and indexes used for joins—must
ensure that this state can be recovered after a failure.
One option is to keep the state in a remote datastore and replicate it, although having
to query a remote database for each individual message can be slow. An alternative
is to keep state local to the stream processor and replicate it periodically. Then, when
the stream processor is recovering from a failure, the new task can read the replicated
state and resume processing without data loss.
For example, Flink periodically captures snapshots of operator state and writes them
to durable storage such as a distributed filesystem [75, 76], and Kafka Streams repli‐
cates state changes by sending them to a dedicated Kafka topic with log compaction,
similar to CDC [83]. VoltDB replicates state by redundantly processing each input
message on several nodes (see “Actual Serial Execution” on page 309).
In some cases, replicating the state may not even be necessary, because it can be
rebuilt from the input streams. For example, if the state consists of aggregations
over a fairly short window, it may be fast enough to simply replay the input events
corresponding to that window. If the state is a local replica of a database, maintained
by CDC, the database can also be rebuilt from the log-compacted change stream.
All this depends on the performance characteristics of the underlying infrastructure.
In some systems, network delay may be lower than disk access latency, and network
bandwidth may be comparable to disk bandwidth. No solution is universally ideal for
all situations, and the merits of local versus remote state may also shift as storage and
networking technologies evolve.
Summary
In this chapter we discussed event streams, the purposes they serve, and how to
process them. In some ways, stream processing is very much like the batch processing
we discussed in Chapter 11, but done continuously on unbounded (never-ending)
streams rather than on a fixed-size input [84]. From this perspective, message brokers
and event logs serve as the streaming equivalent of a filesystem.
We spent some time comparing two types of message brokers:
AMQP/JMS-style message broker
The broker assigns individual messages to consumers, and consumers acknowl‐
edge individual messages when they have been successfully processed. Messages
are deleted from the broker after they have been acknowledged. This approach
is appropriate as an asynchronous form of RPC (see also “Event-Driven Archi‐
tectures” on page 189)—for example, in a task queue, where the exact order of
Summary | 529

message processing is not important and where there is no need to go back and
read old messages again after they have been processed.
Log-based message broker
The broker assigns all messages in a shard to the same consumer node and
always delivers messages in the same order. Parallelism is achieved through
sharding, and consumers track their progress by checkpointing the offset of the
last message they have processed. The broker retains messages on disk, so it is
possible to jump back and reread old messages if necessary.
The log-based approach has similarities to the replication logs found in databases
(see Chapter 6) and log-structured storage engines (see Chapter 4). It is also a form
of consensus, as we saw in Chapter 10. We saw that this approach is especially
appropriate for stream processing systems that consume input streams and generate
derived state or derived output streams.
In terms of where streams come from, we discussed several possibilities; user activity
events, sensors providing periodic readings, and data feeds (e.g., market data in
finance) are naturally represented as streams. We saw that it can also be useful to
think of the writes to a database as a stream. We can capture the changelog—the his‐
tory of all changes made to a database—either implicitly through CDC or explicitly
through event sourcing. Log compaction allows the stream to retain a full copy of the
contents of a database.
Representing databases as streams opens up powerful opportunities for integrating
systems. You can keep derived data systems such as search indexes, caches, and ana‐
lytical systems continually up-to-date by consuming the log of changes and applying
them to the derived system. You can even build fresh views onto existing data by
starting from scratch and consuming the log of changes from the beginning all the
way to the present.
The facilities for maintaining state as streams and replaying messages are also the
basis for the techniques that enable stream joins and fault tolerance in various stream
processing frameworks. We discussed several purposes of stream processing, includ‐
ing searching for event patterns (complex event processing), computing windowed
aggregations (stream analytics), and keeping derived data systems up-to-date (materi‐
alized views).
We then discussed the difficulties of reasoning about time in a stream processor,
including the distinction between processing time and event timestamps and the
problem of dealing with straggler events that arrive after you thought your window
was complete.

530 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

We distinguished three types of joins that may appear in stream processes:
Stream–stream joins
Both input streams consist of activity events, and the join operator searches for
related events that occur within a window of time. For example, the join operator
may match two actions taken by the same user within 30 minutes of each other.
The two join inputs may in fact be the same stream (a self join) if you want to find
related events within that one stream.
Stream–table joins
One input stream consists of activity events, while the other is a database change‐
log. The changelog keeps a local copy of the database up-to-date. For each
activity event, the join operator queries the database and outputs an enriched
activity event.
Table–table joins
Both input streams are database changelogs. In this case, every change on one
side is joined with the latest state of the other side. The result is a stream of
changes to the materialized view of the join between the two tables.
Finally, we discussed techniques for achieving fault tolerance and exactly-once
semantics in a stream processor. As with batch processing, we need to discard the
partial output of any failed tasks. However, since a stream process is long-running

and produces output continuously, we can’t simply discard all output. Instead, a finer-
grained recovery mechanism can be used, based on microbatching, checkpointing,

transactions, or idempotent writes.
References
[1] Tyler Akidau, Robert Bradshaw, Craig Chambers, Slava Chernyak, Rafael J.
Fernández-Moctezuma, Reuven Lax, Sam McVeety, Daniel Mills, Frances Perry, Eric
Schmidt, and Sam Whittle. “The Dataflow Model: A Practical Approach to Balancing
Correctness, Latency, and Cost in Massive-Scale, Unbounded, Out-of-Order Data
Processing.” Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, volume 8, issue 12, pages 1792–
1803, August 2015. doi:10.14778/2824032.2824076
[2] Harold Abelson, Gerald Jay Sussman, and Julie Sussman. Structure and Interpre‐
tation of Computer Programs, 2nd edition. MIT Press, 1996. ISBN: 9780262510875.
Archived at archive.org
[3] Patrick Th. Eugster, Pascal A. Felber, Rachid Guerraoui, and Anne-Marie Kermar‐
rec. “The Many Faces of Publish/Subscribe.” ACM Computing Surveys, volume 35,
issue 2, pages 114–131, June 2003. doi:10.1145/857076.857078

Summary | 531

[4] Don Carney, Uğur Çetintemel, Mitch Cherniack, Christian Convey, Sangdon
Lee, Greg Seidman, Michael Stonebraker, Nesime Tatbul, and Stan Zdonik. “Mon‐
itoring Streams—A New Class of Data Management Applications.” At 28th Inter‐
national Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB), August 2002. doi:10.1016/
B978-155860869-6/50027-5
[5] Matthew Sackman. “Pushing Back.” wellquite.org, May 2016. Archived at
perma.cc/3KCZ-RUFY
[6] Thomas Figg (tef). “How (Not) to Write a Pipeline.” cohost.org, June 2023.
Archived at perma.cc/A3V8-NYCM
[7] Vicent Martí. “Brubeck, a statsd-Compatible Metrics Aggregator.” github.blog,
June 2015. Archived at perma.cc/TP3Q-DJYM
[8] Seth Lowenberger. “MoldUDP64 Protocol Specification V 1.00.” nasdaq‐
trader.com, July 2009. Archived at perma.cc/7CRQ-QBD7
[9] Ian Malpass. “Measure Anything, Measure Everything.” codeascraft.com, February
2011. Archived at archive.org
[10] Dieter Plaetinck. “25 Graphite, Grafana and statsd Gotchas.” grafana.com, March
2016. Archived at perma.cc/3NP3-67U7
[11] Jeff Lindsay. “Web Hooks to Revolutionize the Web.” progrium.com, May 2007.
Archived at perma.cc/BF9U-XNX4
[12] Jim N. Gray. “Queues Are Databases.” Microsoft Research Technical Report
MSR-TR-95-56, December 1995. Archived at arxiv.org
[13] Mark Hapner, Rich Burridge, Rahul Sharma, Joseph Fialli, Kate Stout, and Nigel
Deakin. “JSR-343 Java Message Service (JMS) 2.0 Specification.” jms-spec.java.net,
March 2013. Archived at perma.cc/E4YG-46TA
[14] Sanjay Aiyagari, Matthew Arrott, Mark Atwell, Jason Brome, Alan Conway,
Robert Godfrey, Robert Greig, Pieter Hintjens, John O’Hara, Matthias Radestock,
Alexis Richardson, Martin Ritchie, Shahrokh Sadjadi, Rafael Schloming, Steven Shaw,
Martin Sustrik, Carl Trieloff, Kim van der Riet, and Steve Vinoski. “AMQP: Advanced
Message Queuing Protocol Specification.” Version 0-9-1, November 2008. Archived at
perma.cc/6YJJ-GM9X
[15] “Architectural Overview of Pub/Sub.” cloud.google.com, 2025. Archived at
perma.cc/VWF5-ABP4
[16] Aris Tzoumas. “Lessons from Scaling PostgreSQL Queues to 100k Events Per
Second.” rudderstack.com, July 2025. Archived at perma.cc/QD8C-VA4Y
[17] Robin Moffatt. “Kafka Connect Deep Dive—Error Handling and Dead Letter
Queues.” confluent.io, March 2019. Archived at perma.cc/KQ5A-AB28

532 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

[18] Dunith Danushka. " Message Reprocessing: How to Implement the Dead Letter
Queue.” redpanda.com. Archived at perma.cc/R7UB-WEWF
[19] Damien Gasparina, Loic Greffier, and Sebastien Viale. “KIP-1034: Dead Letter

Queue in Kafka Streams.” cwiki.apache.org, April 2024. Archived at perma.cc/3VXV-
QXAN

[20] Jay Kreps, Neha Narkhede, and Jun Rao. “Kafka: A Distributed Messaging
System for Log Processing.” At 6th International Workshop on Networking Meets
Databases (NetDB), June 2011. Archived at perma.cc/CSW7-TCQ5
[21] Jay Kreps. “Benchmarking Apache Kafka: 2 Million Writes Per Second
(On Three Cheap Machines).” engineering.linkedin.com, April 2014. Archived at
archive.org
[22] Kartik Paramasivam. “How We’re Improving and Advancing Kafka at LinkedIn.”
engineering.linkedin.com, September 2015. Archived at perma.cc/3S3V-JCYJ
[23] Philippe Dobbelaere and Kyumars Sheykh Esmaili. “Kafka Versus RabbitMQ:
A Comparative Study of Two Industry Reference Publish/Subscribe Implementa‐
tions.” At 11th ACM International Conference on Distributed and Event-Based Systems
(DEBS), June 2017. doi:10.1145/3093742.3093908
[24] Kate Holterhoff. “Why Message Queues Endure: A History.” redmonk.com,
December 2024. Archived at perma.cc/6DX8-XK4W
[25] Andrew Schofield. “KIP-932: Queues for Kafka.” cwiki.apache.org, May 2023.
Archived at perma.cc/LBE4-BEMK
[26] Jack Vanlightly. “The Advantages of Queues on Logs.” jack-vanlightly.com, Octo‐
ber 2023. Archived at perma.cc/WJ7V-287K
[27] Jay Kreps. “The Log: What Every Software Engineer Should Know About
Real-Time Data’s Unifying Abstraction.” engineering.linkedin.com, December 2013.
Archived at perma.cc/2JHR-FR64
[28] Andy Hattemer. “Change Data Capture Is Having a Moment. Why?” material‐
ize.com, September 2021. Archived at perma.cc/AL37-P53C
[29] Prem Santosh Udaya Shankar. “Streaming MySQL Tables in Real-Time to Kafka.”
engineeringblog.yelp.com, August 2016. Archived at perma.cc/5ZR3-2GVV
[30] Andreas Andreakis, Ioannis Papapanagiotou. “DBLog: A Watermark Based
Change-Data-Capture Framework.” Archived at arXiv:2010.12597, October 2020.
[31] Jiri Pechanec. “Percolator.” debezium.io, October 2021. Archived at perma.cc/
EQ8E-W6KQ
[32] Debezium maintainers. “Debezium Connector for Cassandra.” debezium.io.
Archived at perma.cc/WR6K-EKMD

Summary | 533

[33] Neha Narkhede. “Announcing Kafka Connect: Building Large-Scale Low-
Latency Data Pipelines.” confluent.io, February 2016. Archived at perma.cc/8WXJ-
L6GF

[34] Chris Riccomini. “Kafka Change Data Capture Breaks Database Encapsulation.”
cnr.sh, November 2018. Archived at perma.cc/P572-9MKF
[35] Gunnar Morling. “‘Change Data Capture Breaks Encapsulation’. Does It,
Though?” decodable.co, November 2023. Archived at perma.cc/YX2P-WNWR
[36] Gunnar Morling. “Revisiting the Outbox Pattern.” decodable.co, October 2024.
Archived at perma.cc/M5ZL-RPS9
[37] Ashish Gupta and Inderpal Singh Mumick. “Maintenance of Materialized Views:
Problems, Techniques, and Applications.” IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin, volume 18,
issue 2, pages 3–18, June 1995. Archived at archive.org
[38] Mihai Budiu, Tej Chajed, Frank McSherry, Leonid Ryzhyk, and Val Tan‐
nen. “DBSP: Incremental Computation on Streams and Its Applications to
Databases.” SIGMOD Record, volume 53, issue 1, pages 87–95, March 2024.
doi:10.1145/3665252.3665271
[39] Jim Gray and Andreas Reuter. Transaction Processing: Concepts and Techniques.
Morgan Kaufmann, 1992. ISBN: 9781558601901
[40] Martin Kleppmann. “Accounting for Computer Scientists.” martin.klepp‐
mann.com, March 2011. Archived at perma.cc/9EGX-P38N
[41] Pat Helland. “Immutability Changes Everything.” At 7th Biennial Conference
on Innovative Data Systems Research (CIDR), January 2015. Archived at perma.cc/
33WX-3669
[42] Martin Kleppmann. Making Sense of Stream Processing. Report, O’Reilly Media,
May 2016. Archived at perma.cc/RAY4-JDVX
[43] Kartik Paramasivam. “Stream Processing Hard Problems—Part 1: Killing
Lambda.” engineering.linkedin.com, June 2016. Archived at archive.org
[44] Stéphane Derosiaux. “CQRS: What? Why? How?” sderosiaux.medium.com, Sep‐
tember 2019. Archived at perma.cc/FZ3U-HVJ4
[45] Baron Schwartz. “Immutability, MVCC, and Garbage Collection.” xaprb.com,
December 2013. Archived at archive.org
[46] Daniel Eloff, Slava Akhmechet, Jay Kreps, et al. “Re: Turning the Database
Inside-out with Apache Samza.” Hacker News discussion, news.ycombinator.com,
March 2015. Archived at perma.cc/ML9E-JC83
[47] Cognitect, Inc. “Datomic Documentation: Excision.” docs.datomic.com. Archived
at perma.cc/J5QQ-SH32
534 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

[48] “Fossil Documentation: Deleting Content from Fossil.” fossil-scm.org, 2025.
Archived at perma.cc/DS23-GTNG
[49] Jay Kreps. “The irony of distributed systems is that data loss is really easy but

deleting data is surprisingly hard.” x.com, March 2015. Archived at perma.cc/7RRZ-
V7B7

[50] Brent Robinson. “Crypto Shredding: How It Can Solve Modern Data Retention
Challenges.” medium.com, January 2019. Archived at perma.cc/4LFK-S6XE
[51] Matthew D. Green and Ian Miers. “Forward Secure Asynchronous Messaging
from Puncturable Encryption.” At IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, May
2015. doi:10.1109/SP.2015.26
[52] David C. Luckham. “What’s the Difference Between ESP and CEP?”
complexevents.com, June 2019. Archived at perma.cc/E7PZ-FDEF
[53] Arvind Arasu, Shivnath Babu, and Jennifer Widom. “The CQL Continuous
Query Language: Semantic Foundations and Query Execution.” The VLDB Journal,
volume 15, issue 2, pages 121–142, June 2006. doi:10.1007/s00778-004-0147-z
[54] Julian Hyde. “Data in Flight: How Streaming SQL Technology Can Help Solve
the Web 2.0 Data Crunch.” ACM Queue, volume 7, issue 11, December 2009.
doi:10.1145/1661785.1667562
[55] Philippe Flajolet, Éric Fusy, Olivier Gandouet, and Frédéric Meunier.
"HyperLogLog: The Analysis of a Near-Optimal Cardinality Estimation Algorithm.”
At Conference on Analysis of Algorithms (AofA), June 2007. doi:10.46298/dmtcs.3545
[56] Jay Kreps. “Questioning the Lambda Architecture.” oreilly.com, July 2014.
Archived at perma.cc/2WY5-HC8Y
[57] Ian Reppel. “An Overview of Apache Streaming Technologies.” ianreppel.org,
March 2016. Archived at perma.cc/BB3E-QJLW
[58] Jay Kreps. “Why Local State Is a Fundamental Primitive in Stream Processing.”
oreilly.com, July 2014. Archived at perma.cc/P8HU-R5LA
[59] RisingWave Labs. “Deep Dive into the RisingWave Stream Processing Engine
—Part 2: Computational Model.” risingwave.com, November 2023. Archived at
perma.cc/LM74-XDEL
[60] Frank McSherry, Derek G. Murray, Rebecca Isaacs, and Michael Isard. “Differ‐
ential Dataflow.” At 6th Biennial Conference on Innovative Data Systems Research
(CIDR), January 2013. Archived at perma.cc/T83W-ZBR2
[61] Andy Hattemer. “Incremental Computation in the Database.” materialize.com,
March 2020. Archived at perma.cc/AL94-YVRN

Summary | 535

[62] Shay Banon. “Percolator.” elastic.co, February 2011. Archived at perma.cc/
LS5R-4FQX
[63] Alan Woodward and Martin Kleppmann. “Real-Time Full-Text Search with
Luwak and Samza.” martin.kleppmann.com, April 2015. Archived at perma.cc/2U92-
Q7R4
[64] Tyler Akidau. “The World Beyond Batch: Streaming 102.” oreilly.com, January
2016. Archived at perma.cc/4XF9-8M2K
[65] Stephan Ewen. “Streaming Analytics with Apache Flink.” At Kafka Summit, April
2016. Archived at perma.cc/QBQ4-F9MR
[66] Tyler Akidau, Alex Balikov, Kaya Bekiroğlu, Slava Chernyak, Josh Haber‐
man, Reuven Lax, Sam McVeety, Daniel Mills, Paul Nordstrom, and Sam Whit‐
tle. “MillWheel: Fault-Tolerant Stream Processing at Internet Scale.” Proceedings
of the VLDB Endowment, volume 6, issue 11, pages 1033–1044, August 2013.
doi:10.14778/2536222.2536229
[67] Alex Dean. “Improving Snowplow’s Understanding of Time.” snowplow.io, Sep‐
tember 2015. Archived at perma.cc/6CT9-Z3Q2
[68] “Azure Stream Analytics: Windowing Functions.” Microsoft Azure Reference,
learn.microsoft.com, July 2025. Archived at archive.org
[69] Rajagopal Ananthanarayanan, Venkatesh Basker, Sumit Das, Ashish Gupta, Hai‐
feng Jiang, Tianhao Qiu, Alexey Reznichenko, Deomid Ryabkov, Manpreet Singh,
and Shivakumar Venkataraman. “Photon: Fault-Tolerant and Scalable Joining of
Continuous Data Streams.” At ACM International Conference on Management of Data
(SIGMOD), June 2013. doi:10.1145/2463676.2465272
[70] Ben Kirwin. “Doing the Impossible: Exactly-Once Messaging Patterns in Kafka.”
ben.kirw.in, November 2014. Archived at perma.cc/A5QL-QRX7
[71] Pat Helland. “Data on the Outside Versus Data on the Inside.” At 2nd Biennial
Conference on Innovative Data Systems Research (CIDR), January 2005. Archived at
perma.cc/K9AH-LQPS
[72] Ralph Kimball and Margy Ross. The Data Warehouse Toolkit: The Definitive
Guide to Dimensional Modeling, 3rd edition. John Wiley & Sons, 2013. ISBN:
9781118530801
[73] Viktor Klang. “I’m coining the phrase ‘effectively-once’ for message process‐
ing with at-least-once + idempotent operations.” x.com, October 2016. Archived at
perma.cc/7DT9-TDG2

536 | Chapter 12: Stream Processing

[74] Matei Zaharia, Tathagata Das, Haoyuan Li, Scott Shenker, and Ion Stoica.
“Discretized Streams: An Efficient and Fault-Tolerant Model for Stream Processing
on Large Clusters.” At 4th USENIX Conference in Hot Topics in Cloud Computing
(HotCloud), June 2012.

[75] Kostas Tzoumas, Stephan Ewen, and Robert Metzger. “High-Throughput, Low-
Latency, and Exactly-Once Stream Processing with Apache Flink.” ververica.com,

August 2015. Archived at archive.org
[76] Paris Carbone, Gyula Fóra, Stephan Ewen, Seif Haridi, and Kostas Tzoumas.
“Lightweight Asynchronous Snapshots for Distributed Dataflows.” arXiv:1506.08603,
June 2015.
[77] Ryan Betts and John Hugg. Fast Data: Smart and at Scale. Report, O’Reilly
Media, October 2015. Archived at perma.cc/VQ6S-XQQY
[78] Neha Narkhede and Guozhang Wang. “Exactly-Once Semantics Are Possible:

Here’s How Kafka Does It.” confluent.io, June 2019. Archived at perma.cc/Q2AU-
Q2ED

[79] Jason Gustafson, Flavio Junqueira, Apurva Mehta, Sriram Subramanian, and
Guozhang Wang. “KIP-98—Exactly Once Delivery and Transactional Messaging.”
cwiki.apache.org, November 2016. Archived at perma.cc/95PT-RCTG
[80] Pat Helland. “Idempotence Is Not a Medical Condition.” Communications of the
ACM, volume 55, issue 5, pages 56–65, May 2012. doi:10.1145/2160718.2160734
[81] Jay Kreps. “Re: Trying to Achieve Deterministic Behavior on Recovery/Rewind.”
Email to samza-dev mailing list, September 2014. Archived at perma.cc/7DPD-GJNL
[82] E. N. (Mootaz) Elnozahy, Lorenzo Alvisi, Yi-Min Wang, and David B.
Johnson. “A Survey of Rollback-Recovery Protocols in Message-Passing Systems.”
ACM Computing Surveys, volume 34, issue 3, pages 375–408, September 2002.
doi:10.1145/568522.568525
[83] Adam Warski. “Kafka Streams—How Does It Fit the Stream Processing Land‐
scape?” softwaremill.com, June 2016. Archived at perma.cc/WQ5Q-H2J2
[84] Stephan Ewen, Fabian Hueske, and Xiaowei Jiang. “Batch as a Special Case
of Streaming and Alibaba’s contribution of Blink.” flink.apache.org, February 2019.
Archived at perma.cc/A529-SKA9

Summary | 537

CHAPTER 13
A Philosophy of Streaming Systems

If a thing be ordained to another as to its end, its last end cannot consist in the preservation
of its being. Hence a captain does not intend as a last end, the preservation of the ship
entrusted to him, since a ship is ordained to something else as its end, viz. to navigation.
(Often quoted as: If the highest aim of a captain was the preserve his ship, he would keep it in
port forever.)
—St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica (1265–1274)
In Chapter 2 we discussed the goal of creating applications and systems that are relia‐
ble, scalable, and maintainable. These themes have run through all the chapters—for
example, we discussed many fault-tolerance algorithms that help improve reliability,
sharding to improve scalability, and mechanisms for evolution and abstraction that
improve maintainability.
In this chapter we will bring all these ideas together and build on the stream‐
ing/event-driven architecture ideas from Chapter 12 in particular to develop a phi‐
losophy of application development that meets those goals. This chapter is more
opinionated than previous chapters, presenting a deep dive into one particular phi‐
losophy rather than comparing multiple approaches.
Data Integration
A recurring theme in this book has been that for any given problem, there are several
solutions, each with its own pros, cons, and trade-offs. For example, when discus‐
sing storage engines in Chapter 4, we examined log-structured storage, B-trees, and
column-oriented storage. When discussing replication in Chapter 6, we considered
single-leader, multi-leader, and leaderless approaches.

539

If you have a problem such as “I want to store some data and look it up again
later,” there is no one right solution, but many approaches that are each appropriate
in different circumstances. A software implementation typically has to pick one
particular approach. It’s hard enough to get one code path robust and performing
well; trying to satisfy too many use cases with many features is likely to lead to poor
implementations of those features, compared to specialized tools.
Thus, the most appropriate choice of software tool also depends on the circum‐
stances. Every piece of software—even a so-called “general-purpose” database—is
designed for a particular usage pattern.
Faced with this profusion of alternatives, the first challenge is to figure out the
mapping between the software products and the circumstances that are a good
fit. Vendors are understandably reluctant to tell you about the kinds of workloads
for which their software is poorly suited, but hopefully the previous chapters have
equipped you with questions to ask that will help you read between the lines and
better understand the trade-offs.
However, even if you perfectly understand the mapping between tools and circum‐
stances for their use, there is another challenge. In complex applications, data is often
used in various ways, and one piece of software is unlikely to be suitable for all of
them. Therefore, you inevitably end up having to cobble together several pieces of
software to provide your application’s functionality.
Combining Specialized Tools by Deriving Data
To give one example, it is common to need to integrate an OLTP database with a
full-text search index in order to handle queries for arbitrary keywords. Although
some databases (such as PostgreSQL) include a full-text indexing feature, which can
be sufficient for simple applications [1], more sophisticated search facilities require
specialist information-retrieval tools. Conversely, search indexes are generally not
very suitable as a durable system of record. Therefore, many applications need to
combine two tools to satisfy all of their requirements.
We touched on the issue of integrating data systems in “Keeping Systems in Sync”
on page 501. As the number of representations of the data increases, the integration
problem becomes harder. Besides the database and the search index, perhaps you
need to keep copies of the data in analytical systems (data warehouses, or batch
and stream processing systems); maintain caches or denormalized versions of objects
that were derived from the original data; pass the data through machine learning,
classification, ranking, or recommendation systems; or send notifications based on
changes to the data.

540 | Chapter 13: A Philosophy of Streaming Systems

Reasoning about dataflows
When copies of the same data need to be maintained in several storage systems in
order to satisfy multiple access patterns, you need to be very clear about the inputs
and outputs. Where is data written first, and which representations are derived from
which sources? How do you get data into all the right places, in the right formats?
For example, you might arrange for data to first be written to a system-of-record
database, after which the changes made to that database are captured (see “Change
Data Capture” on page 503) and applied to the search index in the same order. If
CDC is the only way of updating the index, you can be confident that the index is
entirely derived from the system of record and therefore consistent with it (barring
bugs in the software). Writing to the database is the only way of supplying new input
into this system.
Allowing the application to directly write to both the search index and the database
introduces the problem shown in Figure 12-4, in which two clients concurrently send
conflicting writes, and the two storage systems process them in a different order. In
this case, neither the database nor the search index is “in charge” of determining the
order of writes, so they may make contradictory decisions and become permanently
inconsistent with each other.
If it is possible for you to funnel all user input through a single system that decides on
an ordering for all writes, it becomes much easier to derive other representations of
the data by processing the writes in the same order. This is an application of the state
machine replication approach that we saw in “Consensus in Practice” on page 433.
Whether you use CDC or an event sourcing log is less important than the principle of
deciding on a total order.
Updating a derived data system based on an event log can often be made determinis‐
tic and idempotent (see “Idempotence” on page 528), making it quite easy to recover
from faults.
Derived data versus distributed transactions
The classic approach for keeping data systems consistent with each other involves
distributed transactions, as discussed in “Two-Phase Commit” on page 324. How
does the approach of using derived data systems fare in comparison to distributed
transactions?
At an abstract level, they achieve a similar goal by different means. Distributed
transactions use an atomic commit protocol to ensure that changes are applied
atomically, while log-based systems achieve correctness through deterministic retry
and idempotence.

Data Integration | 541

The biggest difference is that transaction systems usually guarantee that after a value
is written, you can immediately read the up-to-date value (see “Reading your own
writes” on page 210). On the other hand, derived data systems are often updated
asynchronously, so they do not by default guarantee that reads are up-to-date.
Distributed transactions have been used successfully in environments that are willing
to absorb their performance and operational costs. However, XA has poor fault
tolerance and performance characteristics (see “Distributed Transactions Across Dif‐
ferent Systems” on page 328), which severely limit its usefulness. It might be possible
to create a better protocol for distributed transactions, but getting such a protocol
widely adopted and integrated with existing tools would be challenging, and it is
unlikely to happen soon.
In the absence of widespread support for a good distributed transaction protocol,
log-based derived data is the most promising approach for integrating different data
systems. Guarantees such as reading your own writes are useful, though, and it is not
productive to tell everyone “eventual consistency is inevitable—suck it up and learn
to deal with it” (at least not without good guidance on how to deal with it).
Later in this chapter we will discuss some approaches for implementing stronger
guarantees on top of asynchronously derived systems and work toward a middle
ground between distributed transactions and asynchronous log-based systems.
The limits of total ordering
With systems that are small enough, constructing a totally ordered event log is
entirely feasible (as demonstrated by the popularity of databases with single-leader
replication, which construct precisely such a log). However, as systems are scaled
toward bigger and more complex workloads, limitations begin to emerge:
• In most cases, constructing a totally ordered log requires all events to pass
through a single leader node that decides on the ordering. If the throughput of
events is greater than a single machine can handle, you need to shard the log
across multiple machines. The order of events in two shards is then ambiguous.
• If the servers are spread across multiple geographically distributed regions—for
example, in order to tolerate an entire datacenter going offline—you typically
have a separate leader in each datacenter, because network delays make synchro‐
nous cross-datacenter coordination inefficient. This implies an undefined order‐
ing of events that originate in two different datacenters.
• When applications are deployed as microservices, a common design choice is to
deploy each service and its durable state as an independent unit, with no durable
state shared between services. When two events originate in different services,
those events have no defined order.

542 | Chapter 13: A Philosophy of Streaming Systems

• Some applications maintain client-side state that is updated immediately on user
input (without waiting for confirmation from a server), and even continue to
work offline. With such applications, clients and servers are very likely to see
events in different orders.
In formal terms, deciding on a total order of events is known as total order broadcast,
which, as we saw in “The Many Faces of Consensus” on page 427, is equivalent
to consensus. Most consensus algorithms are designed for situations in which the
throughput of a single node is sufficient to process the entire stream of events, and
these algorithms do not provide a mechanism for multiple nodes to share the work of
ordering the events.
Ordering events to capture causality
If no causal link exists between events, the lack of a total order is not a big problem,
since concurrent events can be ordered arbitrarily. Some other cases are easy to
handle—for example, multiple updates of the same object can be totally ordered by
routing all updates for a particular object ID to the same log shard. However, causal
dependencies sometimes arise in more subtle ways.
For example, consider a social networking service and two users who were in a
relationship but have just broken up. One user removes the other as a friend, then
sends a message to their remaining friends complaining about their ex-partner. The
user’s intention is that their ex-partner should not see the rude message, since the
message was sent after that individual’s friend status was revoked.
However, in a system that stores friendship status in one place and messages in
another, that ordering dependency between the unfriend event and the message-send
event may be lost. If the causal dependency is not captured, a service that sends
notifications about new messages may process the message-send event before the
unfriend event and thus incorrectly send a notification to the ex-partner.
In this example, the notifications are effectively a join between the messages and the
friend list, making it related to the timing issues of joins that we discussed previously
(see “Time dependence of joins” on page 525). Unfortunately, this problem doesn’t
seem to have a simple answer [2, 3]. Starting points include the following:
• Logical timestamps can provide total ordering without coordination (see “ID
Generators and Logical Clocks” on page 417), so they may help when total order
broadcast is not feasible. However, they still require recipients to handle events
that are delivered out of order, and they require additional metadata to be passed
around.
• If you can log an event to record the state of the system that the user saw before
making a decision and give that event a unique identifier, then any later events
can reference that event identifier in order to record the causal dependency [4].
Data Integration | 543

• Conflict resolution algorithms (see “Automatic conflict resolution” on page 226)
help with processing events that are delivered in an unexpected order. They are
useful for maintaining state, but they do not help if actions have external side
effects (such as sending a notification to a user).
Perhaps patterns for application development will emerge in the future that allow
causal dependencies to be captured efficiently, and derived state to be maintained
correctly, without forcing all events to go through the bottleneck of total order
broadcast.
Batch and Stream Processing
The goal of data integration is to make sure that data ends up in the right form in all
the right places. Doing so requires consuming inputs, transforming, joining, filtering,
aggregating, training models, evaluating, and eventually writing to the appropriate
outputs. Batch and stream processors are the tools for achieving this goal. The
outputs of batch and stream processes are derived datasets such as search indexes,
materialized views, recommendations to show to users, aggregate metrics, and so on.
As we saw in Chapters 11 and 12, batch and stream processing have a lot of principles
in common. The main fundamental difference is that stream processors operate on
unbounded datasets, whereas batch process inputs are of a known, finite size.
Maintaining derived state
Batch processing has a quite strong functional flavor (even if the code is not written
in a functional programming language). It encourages deterministic, pure functions
whose output depends only on the input and that have no side effects other than the
explicit outputs, treating inputs as immutable and outputs as append-only. Stream
processing is similar, but it extends operators to allow a managed, fault-tolerant state.
The principle of deterministic functions with well-defined inputs and outputs is not
only good for fault tolerance but also simplifies reasoning about the dataflows in an
organization [5]. No matter whether the derived data is a search index, a statistical
model, or a cache, it is helpful to think in terms of data pipelines that derive one thing
from another, pushing state changes in one system through functional application
code and applying the effects to derived systems.
In principle, derived data systems could be maintained synchronously, just as a
relational database updates secondary indexes synchronously within the same trans‐
action as writes to the table being indexed. However, asynchrony is what makes
systems based on event logs robust. It allows a fault in one part of the system to be
contained locally, whereas distributed transactions abort if any one participant fails,
so they tend to amplify failures by spreading them to the rest of the system.

544 | Chapter 13: A Philosophy of Streaming Systems

We saw in “Sharding and Secondary Indexes” on page 268 that secondary indexes
often cross shard boundaries. A sharded system with secondary indexes needs to
either send writes to multiple shards (if the index is term-partitioned) or send reads
to all shards (if the index is document-partitioned). Such cross-shard communication
is also most reliable and scalable if the index is maintained asynchronously [6].
Reprocessing data for application evolution
When maintaining derived data, batch and stream processing are both useful. Stream
processing allows changes in the input to be reflected in derived views with low delay,
whereas batch processing allows large amounts of accumulated historical data to be
reprocessed in order to derive new views onto an existing dataset.
In particular, reprocessing existing data provides a good mechanism for maintaining
a system, evolving it to support new features and changed requirements. Without
reprocessing, schema evolution is limited to simple changes like adding a new
optional field to a record or adding a new type of record. On the other hand, with
reprocessing it is possible to restructure a dataset into a completely different model to
better serve new requirements.

Schema Migrations on Railways

Large-scale “schema migrations” occur in noncomputer systems as well. For example,
in the early days of railway building in 19th-century England there were various
competing standards for the gauge (the distance between the two rails). Trains built
for one gauge couldn’t run on tracks of another gauge, which restricted the possible
interconnections in the train network [7].
After a single standard gauge was finally decided upon in 1846, tracks with other
gauges had to be converted—but how do you do this without shutting down the
train line for months or years? The solution is to first convert the track to dual gauge
or mixed gauge by adding a third rail. This conversion can be done gradually, and
when it is done, trains of both gauges can run on the line, using two of the three
rails. Eventually, once all trains have been converted to the standard gauge, the rail
providing the nonstandard gauge can be removed.
“Reprocessing” the existing tracks in this way, and allowing the old and new versions
to exist side by side, makes it possible to change the gauge gradually over the
course of years. Nevertheless, the undertaking is expensive, which is why nonstandard
gauges still exist today. For example, the BART system in the San Francisco Bay Area
uses a different gauge from the majority of the US.
Derived views allow gradual evolution. If you want to restructure a dataset, you do
not need to perform the migration as a sudden switch. Instead, you can maintain

Data Integration | 545

the old schema and the new schema side by side as two independently derived views
onto the same underlying data. You can then start shifting a small number of users
to the new view in order to test its performance and find any bugs, while most users
continue to be routed to the old view. Gradually, you can increase the proportion of
users accessing the new view, and eventually you can drop the old view [8, 9].
The beauty of such a gradual migration is that every stage of the process is easily
reversible if something goes wrong; you always have a working system to go back to.
Reducing the risk of irreversible damage allows you to be more confident about going
ahead and thus to move faster to improve your system [10].
Unifying batch and stream processing
An early proposal for unifying batch and stream processing was the lambda architec‐
ture [11], which had a number of problems [12] and has fallen out of use. More
recent systems allow batch computations (reprocessing historical data) and stream
computations (processing events as they arrive) to be implemented in the same
system [13]—an approach that is sometimes known as the kappa architecture [12].
Unifying batch and stream processing in one system requires the following features:
• The ability to replay historical events through the same processing engine that
handles the stream of recent events. For example, log-based message brokers
have the ability to replay messages, and some stream processors can read input
from a distributed filesystem or object storage.
• Exactly-once semantics for stream processors—that is, ensuring that the output
is the same as if no faults had occurred, even if faults did in fact occur. As with
batch processing, this requires discarding the partial outputs of any failed tasks.
• Tools for windowing by event time, not by processing time, since processing time
is meaningless when reprocessing historical events. For example, Apache Beam
provides an API for expressing such computations, which can then be run using
Apache Flink or Google Cloud Dataflow.
Unbundling Databases
At an abstract level, databases, batch/stream processors, and operating systems all
perform the same functions: they store some data, and they allow you to process and
query that data [14, 15]. A database stores data in records of a data model (rows in
tables, documents, vertices in a graph, etc.), while an operating system’s filesystem
stores data in files—but at their core, both are “information management” systems
[16]. As we saw in Chapter 11, batch processors are like a distributed version of Unix.
In fact, there are many practical differences. For example, many filesystems do not
cope very well with a directory containing 10 million small files, whereas a database

546 | Chapter 13: A Philosophy of Streaming Systems

containing 10 million small records is completely normal and unremarkable. Never‐
theless, the similarities and differences between operating systems and databases are
worth exploring.
Unix and relational databases have approached the information management prob‐
lem with very different philosophies. Unix viewed its purpose as presenting program‐
mers with a logical but fairly low-level hardware abstraction, whereas relational
databases wanted to give application programmers a high-level abstraction that
would hide the complexities of data structures on disk, concurrency, crash recovery,
and so on. Unix developed pipes and files that are just sequences of bytes, whereas
databases developed SQL and transactions.
Which approach is better? It depends what you want. Unix is “simpler” in the sense
that it is a fairly thin wrapper around hardware resources; relational databases are
“simpler” in the sense that a short declarative query can draw on a lot of powerful
infrastructure (query optimization, indexes, join methods, concurrency control, rep‐
lication, etc.) without the author of the query needing to understand the implementa‐
tion details.
The tension between these philosophies has lasted for decades (both Unix and the
relational model emerged in the early 1970s) and still isn’t resolved. For example, the
NoSQL movement could be interpreted as wanting to apply a Unix-esque approach of
low-level abstractions to the domain of distributed OLTP data storage.
This section attempts to reconcile the two approaches, in the hope that we can
combine the best of both worlds.
Composing Data Storage Technologies
Over the course of this book we have discussed various features provided by data‐
bases and how they work, including these:
• Secondary indexes, which allow you to efficiently search for records based on the
value of a field
• Materialized views, which are a kind of precomputed cache of query results
• Replication logs, which keep copies of the data on other nodes up-to-date
• Full-text search indexes, which allow keyword search in text and which are built
into some relational databases [1]
In Chapters 11 and 12, similar themes emerged; we talked about building full-text
search indexes, about materialized view maintenance, and about replicating changes
from a database to derived data systems by using CDC.
It seems that there are parallels between the features that are built into databases and
the derived data systems that people are building with batch and stream processors.
Unbundling Databases | 547

Creating an index
Think about what happens when you run CREATE INDEX to create a new index in a
relational database. The database has to scan over a consistent snapshot of a table,
pick out all the field values being indexed, sort them, and write out the index. Then it
must process the backlog of writes that have been made since the consistent snapshot
was taken (assuming the table was not locked while creating the index, so writes
could continue). Once that is done, the database must continue to keep the index
up-to-date whenever a transaction writes to the table.
This process is remarkably similar to setting up a new follower replica (see “Setting
Up New Followers” on page 201), and also very similar to bootstrapping CDC in a
streaming system (see “Initial snapshot” on page 504).
Whenever you run CREATE INDEX, the database essentially reprocesses the existing
dataset and derives the index as a new view onto the existing data. The existing data
may be a snapshot of the state rather than a log of all changes that ever happened, but
the two are closely related.
The meta-database of everything
In this light, the dataflow across an entire organization starts looking like one huge
database [5]. Whenever a batch, stream, or ETL process transports data from one
place and form to another place and form, it is acting like the database subsystem that
keeps indexes or materialized views up-to-date.
Viewed like this, batch and stream processors are like elaborate implementations
of triggers, stored procedures, and materialized view maintenance algorithms. The
derived data systems they maintain are like different index types. For example, a
relational database may support B-tree indexes, hash indexes, spatial indexes, and
other types of indexes. In the emerging architecture of derived data systems, instead
of implementing those facilities as features of a single integrated database product,
they are provided by various pieces of software, running on different machines,
administered by different teams.
Where will these developments take us in the future? If we start from the premise
that no single data model or storage format is suitable for all access patterns, there
are two avenues by which different storage and processing tools can nevertheless be
composed into a cohesive system:
Federated databases (unifying reads)
It is possible to provide a unified query interface to a wide variety of underlying
storage engines and processing methods—an approach known as a federated
database or polystore [17, 18]. For example, PostgreSQL’s foreign data wrapper
feature fits this pattern, as do federated query engines such as Trino, Hoptimator,
and Xorq. Applications that need a specialized data model or query interface
548 | Chapter 13: A Philosophy of Streaming Systems

can still access the underlying storage engines directly, while users who want
to combine data from disparate places can do so easily through the federated
interface.
A federated query interface follows the relational tradition of a single integrated
system with a high-level query language and elegant semantics, but a complicated
implementation.
Unbundled databases (unifying writes)
While federation addresses read-only querying across several systems, it does
not have a good answer to synchronizing writes across those systems. We said
that within a single database, creating a consistent index is a built-in feature.
When we compose several storage systems, we similarly need to ensure that all
data changes end up in all the right places, even in the face of faults. Making
it easier to reliably plug together storage systems (e.g., through CDC and event
logs) is like unbundling a database’s index maintenance features in a way that can
synchronize writes across disparate technologies [5, 19].
The unbundled approach follows the Unix tradition of small tools that do one
thing well [20], that communicate through a uniform low-level API (pipes), and
that can be composed using a higher-level language (the shell) [14].
Making unbundling work
Federation and unbundling are two sides of the same coin: composing a reliable,
scalable, and maintainable system out of diverse components. Federated read-only
querying requires mapping one data model into another, which takes some thought
but is ultimately quite a manageable problem. Keeping the writes to several storage
systems in sync is the harder engineering problem, so we will focus on that here.
The traditional approach to synchronizing writes requires distributed transactions
across heterogeneous storage systems [17], which are problematic, as discussed previ‐
ously. Transactions within a single storage or stream processing system are feasible,
but when data crosses the boundary between different technologies, an asynchronous
event log with idempotent writes is a much more robust and practicable approach.
For example, distributed transactions are used within some stream processors to
achieve exactly-once semantics, and this can work quite well. However, when a
transaction would need to involve systems written by different groups of people
(e.g., when data is written from a stream processor to a distributed key-value store
or search index), the lack of a standardized transaction protocol makes integration
much harder. An ordered log of events with idempotent consumers is a much sim‐
pler abstraction and thus is much more feasible to implement across heterogeneous
systems [5].

Unbundling Databases | 549

The big advantage of log-based integration is loose coupling between the various
components, which manifests itself in two ways:
• At a system level, asynchronous event streams make the system as a whole more
robust to outages or performance degradation of individual components. If a
consumer runs slow or fails, the event log can buffer messages, allowing the
producer and any other consumers to continue running unaffected. The faulty
consumer can catch up when it is fixed, so it doesn’t miss any data, and the fault
is contained. By contrast, the synchronous interaction of distributed transactions
tends to escalate local faults into large-scale failures.
• At a human level, unbundling data systems allows software components and
services to be developed, improved, and maintained independently from one
another by different teams. Specialization allows each team to focus on doing
one thing well, with well-defined interfaces to other teams’ systems. Event logs
provide an interface that is powerful enough to capture fairly strong consistency
properties (because of durability and ordering of events), but also general enough
to be applicable to almost any kind of data.
Unbundled versus integrated systems
If unbundling does indeed become the way of the future, it will not replace databases
in their current form. They will still be needed as much as ever, for maintaining
state in stream processors and to serve queries for the output of batch and stream
processors. Specialized query engines will also continue to be important for particular
workloads—for example, query engines in data warehouses are optimized for explor‐
atory analytical queries and handle this kind of workload very well.
The complexity of running several pieces of infrastructure can be a problem. Each
piece of software has a learning curve and its own configuration issues and opera‐
tional quirks, so it is worth deploying as few moving parts as possible. A single
integrated software product may also be able to achieve better and more predictable
performance on the kinds of workloads for which it is designed, compared to a
system consisting of several tools that you have composed with application code [21].
Building for scale that you don’t need is wasted effort and may lock you into an
inflexible design. In effect, it is a form of premature optimization.
The goal of unbundling is not to compete with individual databases on performance
for particular workloads; the goal is to allow you to combine several databases in
order to achieve good performance for a much wider range of workloads than is
possible with a single piece of software. It’s about breadth, not depth.
Thus, if a single technology does everything you need, you’re most likely best off sim‐
ply using that product rather than trying to reimplement it yourself from lower-level

550 | Chapter 13: A Philosophy of Streaming Systems

components. The advantages of unbundling and composition come into the picture
only when no single piece of software satisfies all your requirements.
The tools for composing data systems are getting better. Debezium can extract change
streams from many databases, Kafka’s protocol is becoming a de facto standard for
event streams, and incremental view maintenance engines (see “Incremental View
Maintenance” on page 516) make it possible to precompute and update caches of
complex queries.
Designing Applications Around Dataflow
The general idea of updating derived data when its underlying data changes is noth‐
ing new. For example, spreadsheets have powerful dataflow programming capabilities
[22]: you can put a formula in one cell (e.g., the sum of cells in another column), and
whenever any input to the formula changes, the result of the formula is automatically
recalculated. This is exactly what we want at a data system level. When a record in
a database changes, we want any index for that record to be automatically updated
and any cached views or aggregations that depend on the record to be automatically
refreshed. We should not have to worry about the technical details of how this refresh
happens and should be able to simply trust that it works correctly.
Thus, most data systems still have something to learn from the features that VisiCalc
already had in 1979 [23]. The difference from spreadsheets is that today’s data sys‐
tems need to be fault-tolerant, scalable, and capable of storing data durably. They
also need to be able to integrate disparate technologies written by different groups of
people over time and make use of existing libraries and services. It is unrealistic to
expect all software to be developed using one particular language, framework, or tool.
In this section we will expand on these ideas and explore some ways of building
applications around unbundled databases and dataflow.
Application code as a derivation function
When one dataset is derived from another, it goes through some kind of transforma‐
tion function. For example:
• A secondary index is a kind of derived dataset with a straightforward transfor‐
mation function—for each row or document in the base table, it picks out the
values in the columns or fields being indexed and sorts by those values (assuming
an SSTable or B-tree index, which are sorted by key).
• A full-text search index is created by applying various natural language process‐
ing functions such as language detection, word segmentation, stemming or lem‐
matization, spelling correction, and synonym identification, followed by building
a data structure for efficient lookups (such as an inverted index).

Unbundling Databases | 551

• In an ML system, we can consider the model as being derived from the training
data by applying various feature extraction and statistical analysis functions.
When the model is applied to new input data, its output is derived from that
input and its learned parameters (and hence, indirectly, from the training data).
• A cache often contains an aggregation of data in the form in which it is going to
be displayed in a UI. Populating the cache thus requires knowledge of what fields
are referenced in the UI; changes in the UI may require updating the definition
of how the cache is populated and rebuilding the cache.
The derivation function for a secondary index is so commonly required that it
is built into many databases as a core feature, and you can invoke it by merely
running CREATE INDEX. For full-text indexing, basic linguistic features for common
languages may be built into a database, but the more sophisticated features often
require domain-specific tuning. In machine learning, feature engineering is notori‐
ously application-specific and often has to incorporate detailed knowledge about user
interaction with and the deployment of an application [24].
When the function that creates a derived dataset is not a standard cookie-cutter
function like the one to create a secondary index, custom code is required to handle
the application-specific aspects. This custom code is where many databases struggle.
Although relational databases commonly support triggers, stored procedures, and
user-defined functions, which can be used to execute application code within the
database, they have been somewhat of an afterthought in database design.
Separation of application code and state
In theory, databases could be deployment environments for arbitrary application
code, like an operating system. However, in practice they have turned out to be
poorly suited for this purpose. They do not fit well with the requirements of modern
application development, such as dependency and package management, version
control, rolling upgrades, evolvability, monitoring, metrics, calls to network services,
and integration with external systems.
On the other hand, deployment and cluster management tools such as Kubernetes,
Docker, Mesos, YARN, and others are designed specifically for the purpose of run‐
ning application code. By focusing on doing one thing well, they are able to do it
much better than a database that provides execution of user-defined functions as one
of its many features.
Most web applications today are deployed as stateless services, in which any user
request can be routed to any application server, and the server forgets everything
about the request after it has sent the response. With this style of deployment, servers
can be added and removed at will, which is convenient—but the state has to go
somewhere (typically, a database). The trend has been to keep stateless application

552 | Chapter 13: A Philosophy of Streaming Systems

logic separate from state management (databases): not putting application logic in
the database and not putting persistent state in the application [25]. As people in the
functional programming community like to joke, “We believe in the separation of
Church and state” [26].

Explaining a joke usually ruins it, but here is an explanation any‐
way so that nobody feels left out. Church is a reference to the
mathematician Alonzo Church, who created the lambda calculus,
an early form of computation that is the basis for most functional
programming languages. The lambda calculus has no mutable state
(i.e., no variables that can be overwritten), so one could say that
mutable state is separate from Church’s work.

In this typical web application model, the database acts as a kind of mutable shared
variable that can be accessed synchronously over the network. The application can
read and update the variable, and the database takes care of making it durable,
providing some concurrency control and fault tolerance.
However, in most programming languages you cannot subscribe to changes in a
mutable variable—you can only read it periodically. Unlike in a spreadsheet, readers
of the variable don’t get notified if the value of the variable changes. (You can imple‐
ment such notifications in your own code—this is known as the observer pattern—but
most languages do not have this pattern as a built-in feature.)
Databases have inherited this passive approach to mutable data. If you want to find
out whether the content of the database has changed, often your only option is to poll
(i.e., to repeat your query periodically). Subscribing to changes is only just beginning
to emerge as a feature.
Dataflow: Interplay between state changes and application code
Thinking about applications in terms of dataflow implies renegotiating the relation‐
ship between application code and state management. Instead of treating a database
as a passive variable that is manipulated by the application, we think much more
about the interplay and collaboration between state, state changes, and code that
processes them. Application code responds to state changes in one place by triggering
state changes in another place.
We have already seen this idea in CDC, in the actor model, in triggers, and in
incremental view maintenance. Unbundling the database means applying it to the
creation of derived datasets outside of the primary database: caches, full-text search
indexes, machine learning, or analytical systems. We can use stream processing and
messaging systems for this purpose.

Unbundling Databases | 553

Maintaining derived data requires the following properties, which log-based message
brokers can provide:
• When maintaining derived data, the order of state changes is often important (if
several views are derived from an event log, they need to process the events in the
same order so that they remain consistent with one another).
• Fault tolerance is essential—losing just a single message causes the derived data‐
set to go permanently out of sync with its data source. Both message delivery and
derived state updates must be reliable.
Stable message ordering and fault-tolerant message processing are quite stringent
demands, but they are much less expensive and more operationally robust than
distributed transactions. Modern stream processors can provide these ordering and
reliability guarantees at scale, and they allow application code to be run as stream
operators.
This application code can do the arbitrary processing that built-in derivation func‐
tions in databases generally don’t provide. Like Unix tools chained by pipes, stream
operators can be composed to build large systems around dataflow. Each operator
takes streams of state changes as input and produces other streams of state changes as
output.
Stream processors and services
The currently dominant style of application development breaks functionality into
a set of services that communicate via synchronous network requests such as REST
APIs. The advantage of such a service-oriented architecture over a single monolithic
application is primarily organizational scalability through loose coupling. Different
teams can work on different services, which reduces coordination effort among teams
(as long as the services can be deployed and updated independently).
Composing stream operators into dataflow systems has a lot of similar characteristics
to the microservices approach [27, 28]. However, the underlying communication
mechanism is very different: one-directional, asynchronous message streams rather
than synchronous request/response interactions.
Besides the advantages listed in “Event-Driven Architectures” on page 189, such as
better fault tolerance, dataflow systems can also achieve better performance than
traditional REST APIs or RPC. For example, say a customer is purchasing an item
that is priced in one currency but paid for in another currency. To perform the
currency conversion, you need to know the current exchange rate. This operation
could be implemented in two ways [27, 29]:

554 | Chapter 13: A Philosophy of Streaming Systems

• In the microservices approach, the code that processes the purchase would prob‐
ably query an exchange rate service or database to obtain the current rate for a
particular currency.
• In the dataflow approach, the code that processes purchases would subscribe to
a stream of exchange rate updates ahead of time and record the current rate in
a local database whenever it changes. When it comes to processing the purchase,
the processing code can directly query this local database.
The second approach replaces a synchronous network request to another service
with a query to a local database (which may be on the same machine, even in the
same process). In the microservices approach, you could avoid the synchronous
network request by caching the exchange rate locally in the service that processes the
purchase. However, to keep that cache fresh, you would need to periodically poll for
updated exchange rates or subscribe to a stream of changes—which is exactly what
happens in the dataflow approach.
Not only is the dataflow approach faster, but it is also more robust to the failure of
another service. The fastest and most reliable network request is no network request
at all! Instead of RPC, we now have a stream join between purchase events and
exchange rate update events.
The join is time-dependent: if the purchase events are reprocessed at a later point
in time, the exchange rate will have changed. If you want to reconstruct the original
output, you will need to obtain the historical exchange rate at the original time
of purchase. No matter whether you query a service or subscribe to a stream of
exchange rate updates, you will need to handle this time dependence (see “Time
dependence of joins” on page 525).
Subscribing to a stream of changes, rather than querying the current state when
needed, brings us closer to a spreadsheet-like model of computation. When a piece of
data changes, any derived data that depends on it can swiftly be updated. Many open
questions still remain—for example, around issues like time-dependent joins—but
building applications around dataflow ideas is a promising direction to explore.
Observing Derived State
At an abstract level, the dataflow systems discussed in the previous section give you a
process for creating derived datasets (such as search indexes, materialized views, and
predictive models) and keeping them up-to-date. Let’s call that process the write path.
Whenever a piece of information is written to the system, it may go through multiple
stages of batch and stream processing, and eventually every derived dataset is updated
to incorporate the data that was written. Figure 13-1 shows an example of updating a
search index.

Unbundling Databases | 555

Figure 13-1. In a search index, writes (document updates) meet reads (queries).
But why do you create the derived dataset in the first place? Most likely because you
want to query it again at a later time. This is the read path: when serving a user
request, you read from the derived dataset, perhaps perform more processing on the
results, and construct the response to the user.
Taken together, the write path and the read path encompass the whole journey of the
data, from the point where it is collected to the point where it is consumed (probably
by another human). The write path is the portion of the journey that is precomputed;
it’s done eagerly as soon as the data comes in, regardless of whether anyone has asked
to see it. The read path is the portion of the journey that happens only when someone
asks for it. If you are familiar with functional programming languages, you might
notice that the write path is similar to eager evaluation and the read path is similar to
lazy evaluation.
The derived dataset is the place where the write path and the read path meet, as
illustrated in Figure 13-1. It represents a trade-off between the amount of work that
needs to be done at write time and the amount that needs to be done at read time.
Materialized views and caching
A full-text search index is a good example: the write path updates the index, and
the read path searches the index for keywords. Both reads and writes need to do
some work. Writes need to update the index entries for all terms that appear in the
document. Reads need to search for each word in the query and apply Boolean logic
to find documents that contain all the words in the query (an AND operator) or any
synonym of each word (an OR operator).
If you didn’t have an index, a search query would have to scan over all documents
(like grep), which would get very expensive if you had a large number of documents.

556 | Chapter 13: A Philosophy of Streaming Systems

No index means less work on the write path (no index to update) but a lot more work
on the read path.
On the other hand, you could imagine precomputing the search results for all possi‐
ble queries. In that case, you would have less work to do on the read path: no Boolean
logic, just find the results for your query and return them. However, the write path
would be a lot more expensive. The set of possible search queries that could be asked
is infinite (or at least exponential in the number of terms in the corpus), and thus
precomputing all possible search results would not be possible.
Another option would be to precompute the search results for only a fixed set of
the most common queries, so that they can be served quickly without having to
go to the index. The uncommon queries can still be served from the index. This
would generally be called a cache of common queries, although we could also call it a
materialized view, as it would need to be updated when new documents appear that
should be included in the results of one of the common queries.
From this example, we can see that an index is not the only possible boundary
between the write path and the read path. Caching of common search results is
possible, and grep-like scanning without the index is also possible on a small number
of documents. Viewed like this, the role of caches, indexes, and materialized views is
simple: they shift the boundary between the read path and the write path. They allow
us to do more work on the write path, by precomputing results, in order to save effort
on the read path.
Shifting the boundary between work done on the write path and the read path was in
fact the topic of the social networking example in “Case Study: Social Network Home
Timelines” on page 34. In that example, we also saw how the boundary between write
path and read path might be drawn differently for celebrities compared to ordinary
users. After 500 pages, we have come full circle!
Stateful, offline-capable clients
The idea of a boundary between write and read paths is interesting because we can
discuss shifting that boundary and explore what that shift means in practical terms.
Let’s consider it in a different context.
In the past, web browsers were stateless clients that could do useful things only when
you had an internet connection (just about the only thing you could do offline was
scroll up and down in a page that you had previously loaded while online). However,
single-page JavaScript web apps now have a lot of stateful capabilities, including
client-side UI interaction and persistent local storage in the web browser. Mobile apps
can similarly store a lot of state on the device and don’t require a round trip to the
server for most user interactions.

Unbundling Databases | 557

In “Sync Engines and Local-First Software” on page 220 we saw how persistent
local state enables a class of applications in which users can work offline, without
an internet connection, and sync with remote servers in the background when a
network connection is available [30]. Since mobile devices sometimes have slow and
unreliable cellular internet connections, it’s a big advantage for users if the UI doesn’t
have to wait for synchronous network requests and apps mostly work offline.
When we move away from the assumption of stateless clients talking to a central
database and toward state that is maintained on end-user devices, a world of new
opportunities opens up. In particular, we can think of the on-device state as a cache of
state on the server. The pixels on the screen are a materialized view of model objects in
the client app; the model objects are a local replica of state in a remote datacenter [31].
Pushing state changes to clients
If you load a typical web page in a web browser and the data subsequently changes
on the server, the browser does not find out about the change until you reload the
page. The browser reads the data at only one point in time, assuming that it is static;
the browser does not subscribe to updates from the server. Thus, the state in the
browser is a stale cache that is not updated unless you explicitly poll for changes.
(HTTP-based feed subscription protocols like RSS are really just a basic form of
polling.)
More recent protocols have moved beyond the basic request/response pattern of
HTTP. Server-sent events (the EventSource API) and WebSockets provide commu‐
nication channels by which a web browser can keep an open TCP connection to
a server and the server can actively push messages to the browser as long as it
remains connected. This provides an opportunity for the server to actively inform
the end-user client about any changes to the state it has stored locally, reducing the
staleness of the client-side state.
In terms of our model of write path and read path, actively pushing state changes all
the way to client devices means extending the write path all the way to the end user.
When a client is first initialized, it will still need to use a read path to get its initial
state, but thereafter it can rely on a stream of state changes sent by the server. The
ideas we discussed around stream processing and messaging are thus not restricted
to running in a datacenter; we can take them further and extend them all the way to
end-user devices [32].
The devices will be offline some of the time, and they will be unable to receive any
notifications of state changes from the server during that time. But we already solved
that problem; in “Consumer offsets” on page 498 we discussed how a consumer of a
log-based message broker can reconnect after failing or becoming disconnected and
ensure that it doesn’t miss any messages that arrived while it was disconnected. The

558 | Chapter 13: A Philosophy of Streaming Systems

same technique works for individual users, where each device is a small subscriber to
a small stream of events.
End-to-end event streams
Tools for developing stateful clients and UIs, such as React and Elm [33], already have
the ability to update the rendered UI in response to changes in the underlying state.
It would be very natural to extend this programming model to also allow a server to
push state change events into this client-side event pipeline.
State changes could then could flow through an end-to-end write path: from the
interaction on one device that triggers the change, through event logs and various
derived data systems and stream processors, all the way to the user interface on
another device. These state changes could be propagated with fairly low delay—say,
under one second end to end.
Some applications, such as instant messaging and online games, already have such a
“real-time” architecture (in the sense of interactions with low delay, not in the sense
of response time guarantees). Why don’t we build all applications this way?
The challenge is that the assumption of stateless clients and request/response inter‐
actions is deeply ingrained in our databases, libraries, frameworks, and protocols.
Many datastores support read and write operations where a request returns a single
response, but far fewer support operations where a request returns a stream of
responses over time (i.e., the ability to subscribe to changes).
To extend the write path all the way to the end user, we would need to fundamentally
rethink the way we build many of these systems, moving away from request/response
interaction and toward publish/subscribe dataflow [31]. This would require effort,
but it would have the advantage of making UIs more responsive and providing better
offline support.
Reads are events too
We discussed that when a stream processor writes derived data to a store (database,
cache, or index) and that store is queried, the store acts as the boundary between the
write path and the read path. It allows random-access read queries to the data that
would otherwise require scanning the whole event log.
In many cases, the datastore is separate from the streaming system. However, recall
that stream processors also need to maintain state to perform aggregations and joins.
This state is normally hidden inside the stream processor, but some frameworks allow
it to be queried by outside clients [34], turning the stream processor itself into a kind
of simple database.

Unbundling Databases | 559

Let’s take that idea further. In the model we’ve discussed so far, writes to the store go
through an event log, while reads are transient network requests that go directly to
the nodes that store the data being queried. This is a reasonable design, but not the
only possible one. It is also possible to represent read requests as streams of events
and send both the read events and the write events through a stream processor. The
processor responds to read events by emitting the result of the read to an output
stream [35].
When both writes and reads are represented as events and routed to the same stream
operator, we are in fact performing a stream-table join between the stream of read
queries and the database. Each read event needs to be sent to the database shard
holding the relevant data, just as batch and stream processors copartition inputs on
the same key when performing joins.
This correspondence between serving requests and performing joins is quite funda‐
mental [36]. A one-off read request passes through the join operator, which then
immediately forgets the request; a subscribe request is a persistent join with past and
future events on the other side of the join.
Recording a log of read events potentially also has benefits with regard to tracking
causal dependencies and data provenance across a system. The log would allow you
to reconstruct what the user saw before they made a particular decision. For example,
in an online shop, the predicted shipping date and the inventory status shown to
a customer likely affect whether they choose to buy an item [4]. To analyze this
connection, you need to record the result of the user’s query of the shipping and
inventory status.
Writing read requests to durable storage thus enables better tracking of causal rela‐
tionships, but it incurs additional storage and I/O costs. Optimizing such systems to
reduce the overhead is still an open research problem [2], but if you already log read
requests for operational purposes as a side effect of request processing, it’s not a big
change to make that log the source of the requests instead.
Multishard data processing
For queries that touch only a single shard, the effort of sending them through
a stream and collecting a stream of responses is perhaps overkill. However, this
idea opens the possibility of distributed execution of complex queries that need to
combine data from several shards, taking advantage of the infrastructure for message
routing, sharding, and joining that is already provided by stream processors.
Storm’s distributed RPC feature supports this usage pattern. For example, it has been
used to compute the number of people who have seen a URL on a social network—
that is, the union of the follower sets of everyone who has posted that URL [37]. As
the set of users is sharded, this computation requires combining results from many
shards.
560 | Chapter 13: A Philosophy of Streaming Systems

Another example of this pattern occurs in fraud prevention. To assess the risk of
whether a particular purchase event is fraudulent, you can examine the reputation
scores of the user’s IP address, email address, billing address, shipping address, and
so on. Each of these reputation databases is itself sharded, so collecting the scores
for a particular purchase event requires a sequence of joins with differently sharded
datasets [38].
The internal query execution graphs of data warehouse query engines have similar
characteristics. If you need to perform this kind of multishard join, it is probably
simpler to use a database that provides this feature than to implement it using
a stream processor. However, treating queries as streams provides an option for
implementing large-scale applications that run against the limits of conventional
off-the-shelf solutions.
Aiming for Correctness
With stateless services that only read data, it’s not a big deal if something goes wrong;
you can fix the bug and restart the service, and everything returns to normal. Stateful
systems such as databases are not so simple. They are designed to remember things
forever (more or less), so if something goes wrong, the effects also potentially last
forever—which means they require more careful thought [39].
We want to build applications that are reliable and correct (i.e., programs whose
semantics are well defined and understood, even in the face of various faults). For
approximately four decades, the transaction properties of atomicity, isolation, and
durability have been the tools of choice for building correct applications. However,
those foundations are weaker than they seem: witness, for example, the confusion of
weak isolation levels (see “Weak Isolation Levels” on page 288).
In some areas, transactions have been abandoned entirely and replaced with models
that offer better performance and scalability but messier semantics. Consistency is
often talked about but poorly defined. Some people assert that we should “embrace
weak consistency” for the sake of better availability, while lacking a clear idea of what
that means in practice.
For a topic that is so important, our understanding and our engineering methods
are surprisingly flaky. For example, it is very difficult to determine whether it is
safe to run a particular application using a particular transaction isolation level or
replication configuration [40, 41]. Often, simple solutions appear to work correctly
when concurrency is low and there are no faults, but turn out to have many subtle
bugs in more demanding circumstances.
For example, Kyle Kingsbury’s Jepsen experiments [42] have highlighted the stark
discrepancies between some products’ claimed safety guarantees and their actual
behavior in the presence of network problems and crashes. Even if infrastructure
Aiming for Correctness | 561

products like databases were free from problems, application code would still need
to correctly use the features they provide, which is error-prone if the configuration is
hard to understand (as is the case with weak isolation levels, quorum configurations,
and so on).
If your application can tolerate occasionally corrupting or losing data in unpredicta‐
ble ways, life is a lot simpler, and you might be able to get away with simply crossing
your fingers and hoping for the best. If you need stronger assurances of correctness,
serializability and atomic commit are established approaches, but they come at a cost.
They typically work in only a single datacenter (ruling out geographically distributed
architectures), and they limit the scale and fault-tolerance properties you can achieve.
While the traditional transaction approach is not going away, it is not the last word
in making applications correct and resilient to faults. In this section we will explore
other ways of thinking about correctness in the context of dataflow architectures.
The End-to-End Argument for Databases
Just because an application uses a data system that provides comparatively strong
safety properties, such as serializable transactions, that does not mean the application
is guaranteed to be free from data loss or corruption. For example, if an application
has a bug that causes it to write incorrect data or delete data from a database,
serializable transactions aren’t going to save you. This is an argument in favor of
immutable and append-only data, because it is easier to recover from such mistakes if
you remove the ability of faulty code to destroy good data.
Although immutability is useful, it is not a cure-all by itself. Let’s look at a more
subtle example of how data corruption can occur.
Exactly-once execution of an operation
In “Distributed Transactions Across Different Systems” on page 328 we introduced
the idea of exactly-once (or effectively-once) semantics in the context of message
processing. The idea is this: if something goes wrong while processing a message, you
can either give up (by dropping the message and incurring data loss) or try again. If
you try again, there is the risk that the processing actually succeeded the first time
and you just didn’t get a confirmation, so the message ends up being processed twice.
Processing twice is a form of data corruption: it is undesirable to charge a customer
twice for the same service (billing them too much) or to increment a counter twice
(overstating a metric). In this context, exactly once means arranging the computation
such that the final effect is the same as if no faults had occurred, even if the operation
was retried because of a fault. We discussed a few approaches for achieving this goal.
One of the most effective approaches is to make the operation idempotent—that is, to
ensure that it has the same effect, no matter whether it is executed once or multiple
562 | Chapter 13: A Philosophy of Streaming Systems

times. However, doing this for an operation that is not naturally idempotent requires
effort and care. You may need to maintain additional metadata (such as the set of
operation IDs that have updated a value) and ensure fencing when failing over from
one node to another (see “Distributed Locks and Leases” on page 373).
Duplicate suppression
The same pattern of needing to suppress duplicates occurs in many other places
besides stream processing. For example, TCP uses sequence numbers on packets to
put them in the correct order at the recipient and to determine whether any packets
were lost or duplicated on the network. Any lost packets are retransmitted and any
duplicates are removed by the TCP stack before it hands the data to an application.
However, this duplicate suppression works only within the context of a single TCP
connection. Imagine that the TCP connection is a client’s connection to a database,
and it is currently executing the transaction in Example 13-1. In many databases,
a transaction is tied to a client connection (if the client sends several queries, the
database knows that they belong to the same transaction because they are sent on the
same TCP connection). If the client suffers a network interruption and connection
timeout after sending the COMMIT but before hearing back from the database server, it
does not know whether the transaction has been committed or aborted (we saw this
situation in Figure 9-1).
Example 13-1. A nonidempotent transfer of money from one account to another
BEGIN TRANSACTION;
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance + 11.00 WHERE account_id = 1234;
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance - 11.00 WHERE account_id = 4321;
COMMIT;
The client can reconnect to the database and retry the transaction, but now it is out‐
side the scope of TCP duplicate suppression. Since the transaction in Example 13-1
is not idempotent, $22 could be transferred instead of the desired $11. Thus, even
though code like this is a standard example for transaction atomicity, it is not correct,
and real banks do not work like this [3].
2PC (see “Two-Phase Commit” on page 324) protocols break the one-to-one map‐
ping between a TCP connection and a transaction, since they must allow a transac‐
tion coordinator to reconnect to a database after a network fault and tell it whether
to commit or abort an in-doubt transaction. Is this sufficient to ensure that the
transaction will be executed only once? Unfortunately not.
Even if we can suppress duplicate transactions between the database client and server,
we still need to worry about the network between the end-user device and the
application server. For example, if the end-user client is a web browser, it probably

Aiming for Correctness | 563

uses an HTTP POST request to submit an instruction to the server. Perhaps the user
has a weak cellular data connection, and they succeed in sending the POST request,
but they lose the signal before they are able to receive the response from the server.
In this case, the user will probably be shown an error message, and they may retry man‐
ually. Web browsers warn, “Are you sure you want to submit this form again?”—and
the user says yes, because they want the operation to happen. (The Post/Redirect/Get
pattern [43] avoids this warning message in normal operation, but it doesn’t help if the
POST request times out.) From the web server’s point of view, the retry is a separate
request, and from the database’s point of view, it is a separate transaction. The usual
deduplication mechanisms don’t help.
Uniquely identifying requests
To make a request idempotent through several hops of network communication, it is
not sufficient to rely on a transaction mechanism provided by a database. You need to
consider the end-to-end flow of the request.
For example, you could generate a unique identifier for each request (such as a
UUID) and include it as a hidden form field in the client application, or calculate a
hash of all the relevant form fields to derive the request ID [3]. If the web browser
submits a POST request twice, the two requests will have the same request ID. You
can then pass that request ID all the way through to the database and check that you
always execute only one request with a given ID, as shown in Example 13-2.
Example 13-2. Suppressing duplicate requests by using a unique ID
ALTER TABLE requests ADD UNIQUE (request_id);
BEGIN TRANSACTION;
INSERT INTO requests
(request_id, from_account, to_account, amount)
VALUES('0286FDB8-D7E1-423F-B40B-792B3608036C', 4321, 1234, 11.00);
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance + 11.00 WHERE account_id = 1234;
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance - 11.00 WHERE account_id = 4321;
COMMIT;
This code relies on a uniqueness constraint on the request_id column. If a transac‐
tion attempts to insert an ID that already exists, the INSERT fails and the transaction
is aborted, preventing it from taking effect twice. Relational databases can generally
maintain a uniqueness constraint correctly, even at weak isolation levels (whereas
an application-level check-then-insert may fail under nonserializable isolation, as
discussed in “Write Skew and Phantoms” on page 303).

564 | Chapter 13: A Philosophy of Streaming Systems

Besides suppressing duplicate requests, the requests table in Example 13-2 acts as
a kind of event log, which can be useful for event sourcing or CDC. The updates to
the account balances don’t have to happen in the same transaction as the insertion of
the event, since they are redundant and could be derived from the request event in
a downstream consumer—as long as the event is processed exactly once, which can
again be enforced using the request ID.
The end-to-end argument
This scenario of suppressing duplicate transactions is just one example of a more
general principle called the end-to-end argument, which was articulated by Saltzer,
Reed, and Clark in 1984 [44]:
The function in question can completely and correctly be implemented only with
the knowledge and help of the application standing at the endpoints of the commu‐
nication system. Therefore, providing that questioned function as a feature of the
communication system itself is not possible. (Sometimes an incomplete version of
the function provided by the communication system may be useful as a performance
enhancement.)
In our example, the function in question was duplicate suppression. We saw that
TCP suppresses duplicate packets at the TCP connection level, and some stream
processors provide so-called exactly-once semantics at the message processing level,
but that is not enough to prevent a user from submitting a duplicate request if the
first one times out. By themselves, TCP, database transactions, and stream processors
cannot entirely rule out these duplicates. Solving the problem requires an end-to-end
solution: a transaction identifier that is passed all the way from the end-user client to
the database.
The end-to-end argument also applies to checking the integrity of data. Checksums
built into Ethernet, TCP, and TLS can detect corruption of packets in the network,
but they cannot detect corruption due to bugs in the software at the sending and
receiving ends of the network connection, or corruption on the disks where the data
is stored. If you want to catch all possible sources of data corruption, you also need
end-to-end checksums.
A similar argument applies with encryption [44]. The password on your home
WiFi network protects against people snooping your WiFi traffic, but not against
attackers elsewhere on the internet; TLS/SSL between your client and the server
protects against network attackers, but not against compromises of the server. Only
end-to-end encryption and authentication can protect against all these things.
Although the low-level features (TCP duplicate suppression, Ethernet checksums,
WiFi encryption) cannot provide the desired end-to-end features by themselves, they
are still useful, since they reduce the probability of problems at higher levels. For
example, HTTP requests would often get mangled if we didn’t have TCP putting
Aiming for Correctness | 565

the packets back in the right order. We just need to remember that the low-level
reliability features are not by themselves sufficient to ensure end-to-end correctness.
Applying end-to-end thinking in data systems
This brings us back to the original thesis: just because an application uses a data
system that provides comparatively strong safety properties, such as serializable
transactions, that does not mean the application is guaranteed to be free from data
loss or corruption. The application itself needs to take end-to-end measures, such as
duplicate suppression, as well.
That is a shame, because fault-tolerance mechanisms are hard to get right. Low-level
reliability mechanisms, such as those in TCP, work quite well, so the remaining
higher-level faults occur fairly rarely. It would be really nice to wrap up the high-level
fault-tolerance machinery in an abstraction so that application code needn’t worry
about it—but it seems that we have not yet found the right one.
Transactions have long been seen as a useful abstraction. As discussed in Chapter 8,
they take a wide range of possible issues (concurrent writes, constraint violations,
crashes, network interruptions, disk failures) and collapse them down to two possible
outcomes: commit or abort. That is a huge simplification of the programming model,
but it is not enough.
Transactions are expensive, especially when they involve heterogeneous storage tech‐
nologies (see “Distributed Transactions Across Different Systems” on page 328).
When we refuse to use distributed transactions because they are too expensive, we
end up having to reimplement fault-tolerance mechanisms in application code. As
numerous examples throughout this book have shown, reasoning about concurrency
and partial failure is difficult and counterintuitive, and so most application-level
mechanisms do not work correctly. The consequence is lost or corrupted data.
For these reasons, it is worth exploring fault-tolerance abstractions that make it easy to
provide application-specific end-to-end correctness properties, but also maintain good
performance and operational characteristics in a large-scale distributed environment.
Enforcing Constraints
Let’s think about correctness in the context of the ideas around unbundling databases.
We saw that end-to-end duplicate suppression can be achieved with a request ID that
is passed all the way from the client to the database that records the write. What about
other kinds of constraints?
In particular, let’s focus on uniqueness constraints, such as the one we relied on
in Example 13-2. In “Constraints and uniqueness guarantees” on page 409 we saw
several other examples of application features that need to enforce uniqueness: a
username or email address must uniquely identify a user, a file storage service cannot
566 | Chapter 13: A Philosophy of Streaming Systems

have more than one file with the same name, and two people cannot book the same
seat on a flight or in a theater.
Other kinds of constraints are very similar—for example, ensuring that an account
balance never goes negative, that you don’t sell more items than you have in stock
in the warehouse, or that a meeting room does not have overlapping bookings.
Techniques that enforce uniqueness can often be used for these kinds of constraints
as well.
Uniqueness constraints require consensus
In Chapter 10 we saw that in a distributed setting, enforcing a uniqueness constraint
requires consensus. If several concurrent requests have the same value, the system
somehow needs to decide which one of the conflicting operations is accepted and
reject the others as violations of the constraint.
The most common way of achieving this consensus is to make a single node the
leader and put it in charge of making all the decisions. That works fine as long as you
don’t mind funneling all requests through a single node (even if the client is on the
other side of the world), and as long as that node doesn’t fail. Consensus algorithms
like Raft tackle the problem of safely electing a new leader if the current leader has
failed (or is believed to have failed because of a network problem) and preventing
split brain.
Uniqueness checking can be scaled out by sharding based on the value that needs
to be unique. For example, if you need to ensure uniqueness by request ID, as in
Example 13-2, you can ensure that all requests with the same request ID are routed
to the same shard. If you need usernames to be unique, you can shard by hash of
username.
However, asynchronous multi-leader replication is ruled out, because different lead‐
ers could concurrently accept conflicting writes, and thus the values are no longer
unique. If you want to be able to immediately reject any writes that would violate the
constraint, synchronous coordination is unavoidable [45].
Uniqueness in log-based messaging
A shared log ensures that all consumers see messages in the same order (the total
order broadcast guarantee that, as we established in “The Many Faces of Consensus”
on page 427, is equivalent to consensus). In the unbundled database approach with
log-based messaging, we can use a very similar approach to enforce uniqueness
constraints.
A stream processor consumes all the messages in a log shard sequentially on a single
thread. Thus, if the log is sharded based on the value that needs to be unique,
a stream processor can unambiguously and deterministically decide which one of

Aiming for Correctness | 567

several conflicting operations came first in the log. For example, in the case of several
users trying to claim the same username [46]:
1. Every request for a username is encoded as a message and appended to a shard
determined by the hash of the username.
2. A stream processor sequentially reads the requests in the log, using a local
database to keep track of which usernames are taken. For every request for a
username that is available, it records the name as taken and emits a success
message to an output stream. For every request for a username that is already
taken, it emits a rejection message to an output stream.
3. The client that requested the username watches the output stream and waits for a
success or rejection message corresponding to its request.
This algorithm is the same as the construction for achieving consensus using a shared
log, which we saw in Chapter 10. It scales easily to a large request throughput by
increasing the number of shards, as each shard can be processed independently.
The approach works not only for uniqueness constraints but also for many other
kinds of constraints. Its fundamental principle is that any writes that may conflict are
routed to the same shard and processed sequentially. The definition of a conflict may
depend on the application, but the stream processor can use arbitrary logic to validate
a request.
Multishard request processing
Ensuring that an operation is executed atomically, while satisfying constraints,
becomes more interesting when several shards are involved. In Example 13-2, there
are potentially three shards: one containing the request ID, one containing the payee
account, and one containing the payer account. There is no reason those three things
should be in the same shard, since they are all independent from one another.
In the traditional approach to databases, executing this transaction would require an
atomic commit across all three shards, which essentially forces it into a total order
with respect to all other transactions on any of those shards. Since there is now
cross-shard coordination, different shards can no longer be processed independently,
so throughput is likely to suffer.
However, equivalent correctness can be achieved without cross-shard transactions
by using sharded logs and stream processors. Figure 13-2 shows an example of
a payment transaction that needs to check whether the source account contains
sufficient funds and, if so, atomically transfers an amount to a destination account
while deducting fees.

568 | Chapter 13: A Philosophy of Streaming Systems

Figure 13-2. Checking whether a source account has enough money and atomically
transferring money to a destination account and a fees account, using event logs and
stream processors
This process works as follows [47]:
1. The request to transfer money from the source account to the destination
account is given a unique request ID by the user’s client and appended to a
log shard based on the source account ID.
2. A stream processor reads the log of requests and maintains a database containing
the state of the source account and the IDs of requests it has already processed.
The contents of this database are entirely derived from the log. When the stream
processor encounters a request with an ID that it has not seen before, it checks in
its local database whether the source account has enough money to perform the
transfer.
If so, it updates its local database to reserve the payment amount on the source
account and emits events to several other logs: an outgoing payment event to the
log shard for the source account (its own input log), an incoming payment event
to the log shard for the destination account, and an incoming payment event to
the log shard for the fees account. The original request ID is included in those
emitted events.
3. Eventually, the outgoing payment event is delivered back to the source account
processor (which may have received unrelated events in the meantime). The
stream processor recognizes based on the request ID that this is a payment it
previously reserved and executes the payment, again updating its local state for
the source account. It ignores duplicates based on request ID.

Aiming for Correctness | 569

4. The log shards for the destination and fees accounts are consumed by independ‐
ent stream processing tasks. When they receive an incoming payment event, they
update their local state to reflect the payment, and they deduplicate events based
on request ID.
Figure 13-2 shows the three accounts as being in three separate shards, but they could
just as well be in the same shard—it doesn’t matter. The only requirements are that
the events for any given account are processed strictly in log order with at-least-once
semantics and that the stream processors are deterministic.
For example, consider what happens if the source account processor crashes while
processing a payment request. The output messages may or may not have been
emitted before the crash occurred. After recovering from the crash, the processor will
process the same request again (because of at-least-once semantics), and it will make
the same decision on whether to allow the payment (since it’s deterministic). It will
therefore emit the same output messages with the same request ID to the outgoing,
incoming, and fees account shards. If the messages are duplicates, the downstream
consumers will ignore them based on the request ID.
Atomicity in this system comes not from transactions, but from the fact that writing
the initial request event to the source account log is an atomic action. Once that
one event is in the log, all the downstream events will eventually be written as well—
possibly after stream processors have recovered from crashes, and possibly with
duplicates, but they will appear eventually.
With exactly-once semantics, this example becomes easier to implement, since the
semantics ensure that the stream processor’s local state is consistent with the set of
messages it has processed. Thus, if it crashes and reprocesses some messages, its local
state is also reset to what it was before those messages were processed.
If the user in Figure 13-2 wants to find out whether their transfer was approved, they
can subscribe to the source account log shard and wait for the outgoing payment
event. To explicitly notify the user if the balance is insufficient, the stream processor
can emit a “declined payment” event to that log shard.
By breaking the multishard transaction into several differently sharded stages and
using the end-to-end request ID, we achieve the same correctness property (every
request is applied exactly once to both the payer and payee accounts), even in the
presence of faults, without using an atomic commit protocol.

570 | Chapter 13: A Philosophy of Streaming Systems

Timeliness and Integrity
A convenient property of many transactional systems is that as soon as one transaction
commits, its writes are immediately visible to other transactions. This property is
formalized as strict serializability (discussed in “Linearizability Versus Serializability”
on page 407).
This is not the case when unbundling an operation across multiple stages of stream
processors. Consumers of a log are asynchronous by design, so a producer does not
wait until its message has been processed by consumers. However, it is possible for a
client to wait for a message to appear on an output stream, like the user waiting for
an outgoing payment or payment declined event in Figure 13-2, which depends on
whether there was enough money in the source account.
In this example, the correctness of the source account balance check does not depend
on whether the user making the request waits for the outcome. The waiting has the
purpose of only synchronously informing the user whether the payment succeeded;
this notification is decoupled from the effects of processing the request.
More generally, the term consistency conflates two requirements that are worth con‐
sidering separately:
Timeliness
Timeliness means ensuring that users observe the system in an up-to-date state.
We saw previously that if a user reads from a stale copy of the data, they may
observe it in an inconsistent state (see “Problems with Replication Lag” on page
209). However, that inconsistency is temporary, and it will eventually be resolved
simply by waiting and trying again.
The CAP theorem uses “consistency” in the sense of linearizability, which is a

strong way of achieving timeliness. Weaker timeliness properties, like read-after-
write consistency, can also be useful.

Integrity
Integrity means absence of corruption—no data loss, and no contradictory or
false data. In particular, if a derived dataset is maintained as a view onto under‐
lying data, the derivation must be correct. For example, a database index must
correctly reflect the contents of the database—an index with missing records is
not very useful.
If integrity is violated, the inconsistency is permanent; waiting and trying again is
not going to fix database corruption in most cases. Instead, explicit checking and
repair is needed. In the context of ACID transactions, “consistency” is usually
understood as some kind of application-specific notion of integrity. Atomicity
and durability are important tools for preserving integrity.

Aiming for Correctness | 571

In slogan form: violations of timeliness are allowed under eventual consistency,
whereas violations of integrity result in perpetual inconsistency.
In most applications, integrity is much more important than timeliness. Violations
of timeliness can be annoying and confusing, but violations of integrity can be
catastrophic.
For example, on your credit card statement, it is not surprising if a transaction
that you made within the last 24 hours does not yet appear. It is normal that these
systems have a certain lag. We know that banks reconcile and settle transactions
asynchronously, and timeliness is not very important here [3]. However, it would be
very bad if the statement balance was not equal to the sum of the transactions plus
the previous statement balance (an error in the sums), or if a transaction was charged
to you but not paid to the merchant (disappearing money). Such problems would be
violations of the integrity of the system.
Correctness of dataflow systems
ACID transactions usually provide both timeliness (e.g., linearizability) and integrity
(e.g., atomic commit) guarantees. Thus, if you approach application correctness from
the point of view of ACID transactions, the distinction between timeliness and
integrity is fairly inconsequential.
On the other hand, an interesting property of the event-based dataflow systems that
we have discussed in this chapter is that they decouple timeliness and integrity. When
processing event streams asynchronously, there is no guarantee of timeliness, unless
you explicitly build consumers that wait for a message to arrive before returning. For
example, a user could request a payment and then read the state of their account
before the stream processor has executed the request; the user will not see the
payment they just requested.
However, integrity is in fact central to streaming systems. As we’ve seen, exactly-once
or effectively-once semantics is a mechanism for preserving integrity. If an event is

lost or takes effect twice, the integrity of a data system could be violated. Thus, fault-
tolerant message delivery and duplicate suppression (e.g., idempotent operations) are

important for maintaining the integrity of a data system in the face of faults.
As we saw in the previous section, reliable stream processing systems can preserve
integrity without requiring distributed transactions and an atomic commit protocol,
which means they can potentially achieve comparable correctness with much better
performance and operational robustness. We achieved this integrity through a combi‐
nation of mechanisms:
• Representing the content of the write operation as a single message, which can
easily be written atomically—an approach that fits very well with event sourcing

572 | Chapter 13: A Philosophy of Streaming Systems

• Deriving all other state updates from that single message via deterministic deri‐
vation functions, similarly to stored procedures
• Passing a client-generated request ID through all these levels of processing,
enabling end-to-end duplicate suppression and idempotence
• Making messages immutable and allowing derived data to be reprocessed from
time to time, which makes it easier to recover from bugs
Loosely interpreted constraints
As discussed previously, enforcing a uniqueness constraint requires consensus, typ‐
ically implemented by funneling all events in a particular shard through a single
node. This limitation is unavoidable if we want the traditional form of uniqueness
constraint, and stream processing cannot get around it.
However, many real applications have a business requirement to allow violations of
what you might think of as hard constraints:
• If customers order more items than you have in your warehouse, you can order
in more stock, apologize for the delay, and offer them a discount. This is the same
as what you’d have to do if, say, a forklift truck ran over some of the items in your
warehouse, leaving you with fewer items in stock than you thought you had [3].
Thus, the apology workflow already needs to be part of your business processes
anyway in order to deal with such incidents, and a hard constraint on the number
of items in stock might be unnecessary.
• Similarly, many airlines overbook airplanes with the expectation that some pas‐
sengers will miss their flight, and many hotels overbook rooms, expecting that
some guests will cancel. In these cases, the constraint of “one person per seat” is
deliberately violated for business reasons, and compensation processes (refunds,
upgrades, providing a complimentary room at a neighboring hotel) are put in
place to handle demand that exceeds supply. Even if no overbooking occurred,
apology and compensation processes would be needed to deal with events such as
flights being canceled because of bad weather or staff going on strike—recovering
from such issues is just a normal part of business [3].
• If someone withdraws more money than they have in their account, the bank
can charge them an overdraft fee and ask them to pay back what they owe. By
limiting the total withdrawals per day, the risk to the bank is bounded.
• In systems that integrate data across organizations, inconsistencies will inevitably
arise, and correction mechanisms are necessary to handle them. As noted in
“Batch Use Cases” on page 476, settlement of payments between banks is an
example of this.

Aiming for Correctness | 573

In many business contexts, it is therefore acceptable to temporarily violate a con‐
straint and fix it up later by apologizing. This kind of change to correct a mistake is
called a compensating transaction [48, 49]. The cost of the apology (in terms of money
or reputation) varies, but it is often quite low; you can’t unsend an email, but you
can send a follow-up email with a correction. If you accidentally charge a credit card
twice, you can refund one of the charges, and the cost to you is just the processing
fees and perhaps a customer complaint. Once money has been paid out of an ATM,
you can’t directly get it back, although in principle you can send debt collectors to
recover the money if the account was overdrawn and the customer won’t return it.
Whether the cost of the apology is acceptable is a business decision. If it is acceptable,
the traditional model of checking all constraints before even writing the data is
unnecessarily restrictive. It may well be reasonable to go ahead with a write optimisti‐
cally and check the constraint after the fact. You can still ensure that the validation
occurs before taking actions that would be expensive to recover from, but that doesn’t
imply you must validate before you even write the data.
These applications do require integrity. You would not want to lose a reservation
or have money disappear because of mismatched credits and debits. But they don’t
require timeliness on the enforcement of the constraint. If you have sold more items
than you have in the warehouse, you can patch up the problem after the fact. Doing
so is similar to the conflict resolution approaches we discussed in “Dealing with
Conflicting Writes” on page 222.
Coordination-avoiding data systems
We have now made two interesting observations:
• Dataflow systems can maintain integrity guarantees on derived data without
atomic commit, linearizability, or synchronous cross-shard coordination.
• Although strict uniqueness constraints require timeliness and coordination,
many applications are fine with loose constraints that may be temporarily vio‐
lated and fixed up later, as long as integrity is preserved throughout.
Taken together, these observations mean that dataflow systems can provide data
management services for many applications without requiring coordination, while
still giving strong integrity guarantees. Such coordination-avoiding data systems have
a lot of appeal; they can achieve better performance and fault tolerance than systems
that need to perform synchronous coordination [45].
For example, such a system could operate distributed across multiple datacenters
in a multi-leader configuration, asynchronously replicating between regions. Any
one datacenter can continue operating independently from the others, because no
synchronous cross-region coordination is required. Such a system would have weak

574 | Chapter 13: A Philosophy of Streaming Systems

timeliness guarantees—it could not be linearizable without introducing coordina‐
tion—but it can still have strong integrity guarantees.
In this context, serializable transactions are still useful as part of maintaining derived
state, but they can be run at a small scope where they work well [6]. Heterogeneous
distributed transactions such as XA transactions are not required. Synchronous coor‐
dination can still be introduced in places where it is needed (for example, to enforce
strict constraints before an operation from which recovery is not possible), but there
is no need for everything to pay the cost of coordination if only a small part of an
application needs it [32].
Another way of looking at coordination and constraints is that they reduce the
number of apologies you have to make for inconsistencies but potentially also reduce
the performance and availability of your system, and thus potentially increase the
number of apologies you have to make for outages. You cannot reduce the number of
apologies to zero, but you can aim to find the best trade-off for your needs—the sweet
spot with neither too many inconsistencies nor too many availability problems.
Trust, but Verify
All of our discussion of correctness, integrity, and fault tolerance has been under the
assumption that certain things might go wrong, but other things won’t. We call such
assumptions our system model (see “System Model and Reality” on page 380). For
example, we should assume that processes can crash, machines can suddenly lose
power, and the network can arbitrarily delay or drop messages. We might also assume
that data written to disk is not lost after fsync, that data in memory is not corrupted,
and that the multiplication instruction of our CPU always returns the correct result.
These assumptions are quite reasonable, as they are true most of the time, and it
would be difficult to get anything done if we had to constantly worry about our
computers making mistakes. Traditionally, system models take a binary approach
toward faults: we assume that some things can happen and that other things can
never happen. In reality, it is more a question of probabilities: some things are more
likely, other things less likely. The question is whether violations of our assumptions
happen often enough that we may encounter them in practice.
We have seen that data can become corrupted in memory (see “Hardware and
Software Faults” on page 44), on disk (see “Replication and Durability” on page 283),
and on the network (see “Weak forms of lying” on page 379). Maybe this is something
we should be paying more attention to? If you are operating at large enough scale,
even very unlikely things do happen.

Aiming for Correctness | 575

Maintaining integrity in the face of software bugs
Besides such hardware issues, there is always the risk of software bugs, which would
not be caught by lower-level network, memory, or filesystem checksums. Even widely
used database software has bugs—for example, past versions of MySQL have failed to
correctly maintain uniqueness constraints [50], and PostgreSQL’s serializable isolation
level has exhibited write skew anomalies in the past [51], even though MySQL and
PostgreSQL are robust and well-regarded databases that have been battle-tested by
many people for many years. In less mature software, the situation is likely to be
much worse.
Despite considerable efforts in careful design, testing, and review, bugs still creep in.
Although they are rare, and they eventually get found and fixed, there is still a period
during which such bugs can corrupt data.
When it comes to application code, we have to assume many more bugs, since most
applications don’t receive anywhere near the amount of review and testing that data‐
base code does. Many applications don’t even correctly use the features that databases
offer for preserving integrity, such as foreign-key or uniqueness constraints [25].
Consistency in the sense of ACID is based on the idea that the database starts off in a
consistent state, and a transaction transforms it from one consistent state to another
consistent state. Thus, we expect the database to always be in a consistent state.
However, this notion makes sense only if we assume that the transaction is free from
bugs. If the application uses the database incorrectly in some way—for example, using
a weak isolation level unsafely—the integrity of the database cannot be guaranteed.
Don’t just blindly trust what they promise
With both hardware and software not always living up to our ideals, data corruption
seems inevitable sooner or later. Thus, we should at least have a way of finding out if
data has been corrupted so that we can fix it and try to track down the source of the
error. Checking the integrity of data is known as auditing.
As discussed in “Advantages of immutable events” on page 509, auditing is not just
for financial applications. However, auditability is very important in finance precisely
because everyone knows that mistakes happen, and we all recognize the need to be
able to detect and fix problems.
Mature systems similarly tend to consider the possibility of unlikely things going
wrong and manage that risk. For example, large-scale storage systems such as HDFS
and Amazon S3 do not fully trust disks. These systems run background processes that
continually read back files, compare them to other replicas, and move files from one
disk to another, in order to mitigate the risk of silent corruption [52, 53].
If you want to be sure that your data is still there, you have to read it and check. Most
of the time it will still be there, but if it isn’t, you want to find out sooner rather than
576 | Chapter 13: A Philosophy of Streaming Systems

later. By the same argument, it is important to try restoring from your backups from
time to time—otherwise, you may find out that your backup is broken when it is too
late and you have already lost data. Don’t just blindly trust that it is all working.
Systems like HDFS and S3 still have to assume that disks work correctly most of
the time—which is a reasonable assumption, but not the same as assuming that
they always work correctly. However, not many systems currently have this kind of
“trust, but verify” approach of continually auditing themselves. Many assume that
correctness guarantees are absolute and make no provision for the possibility of rare
data corruption. In the future we may see more self-validating or self-auditing systems
that continually check their own integrity rather than rely on blind trust [54].
Designing for auditability
If a transaction mutates several objects in a database, the underlying reason can be
difficult to tell after the fact. Even if you capture the transaction logs, the insertions,
updates, and deletions in various tables do not necessarily give a clear picture of why
those mutations were performed. The invocation of the application logic that decided
on those mutations is transient and cannot be reproduced.
By contrast, event-based systems can provide better auditability. In the event sourcing
approach, user input to the system is represented as a single immutable event, and
any resulting state updates are derived from that event. The derivation can be made
deterministic and repeatable, so that running the same log of events through the same
version of the derivation code will result in the same state updates.
Being explicit about dataflow makes the provenance of data much clearer, which
makes integrity checking much more feasible. For the event log, we can use hashes
to check that the event storage has not been corrupted. For any derived state, we can
rerun the batch and stream processors that derived it from the event log to check
whether we get the same result, or even run a redundant derivation in parallel.
A deterministic and well-defined dataflow also makes it easier to debug and trace
the execution of a system to determine why it did something [4, 55]. If something
unexpected occurred, it is valuable to have the diagnostic capability to reproduce
the exact circumstances that led to the unexpected event—a kind of time-travel
debugging capability.
The end-to-end argument again
If we cannot fully trust that every individual component of the system will be free
from corruption—that every piece of hardware is fault-free and every piece of soft‐
ware is bug-free—then we must at least periodically check the integrity of our data.
If we don’t check, we won’t find out about corruption until it is too late and it has
caused some downstream damage, at which point it will be much harder and more
expensive to track down the problem.

Aiming for Correctness | 577

Checking the integrity of data systems is best done in an end-to-end fashion. The
more systems we can include in an integrity check, the fewer opportunities there are
for corruption to go unnoticed at some stage of the process. If we can check that an
entire derived data pipeline is correct end to end, then any disks, networks, services,
and algorithms along the path are implicitly included in the check.
Having continuous end-to-end integrity checks gives you increased confidence about
the correctness of your systems, which in turn allows you to move faster [56]. Like
automated testing, auditing increases the chances that bugs will be found quickly, and
thus reduces the risk that a change to the system or a new storage technology will
cause damage. If you are not afraid of making changes, you can much better evolve
an application to meet changing requirements.
Tools for auditable data systems
At present, not many data systems make auditability a top-level concern. Some
applications implement their own audit mechanisms—for example, by logging all
changes to a separate audit table—but guaranteeing the integrity of the audit log and
the database state is still difficult. A transaction log can be made tamper-proof by
periodically signing it with a hardware security module, but that does not guarantee
that the right transactions went into the log in the first place.
Blockchains such as Bitcoin and Ethereum are shared append-only logs with cryp‐
tographic consistency checks; the transactions they store are events, and smart con‐
tracts are basically stream processors. The consensus protocols they use ensure that
all nodes agree on the same sequence of events. The difference from the consensus
protocols of Chapter 10 is that blockchains are Byzantine fault-tolerant—that is, they
still work if some of the participating nodes have corrupted data because the replicas
continually check one another’s integrity.
For most applications, blockchains have too high an overhead to be useful. However,
some of their cryptographic tools can also be used in a lighter-weight context. For
example, Merkle trees [57] are trees of hashes that can be used to efficiently prove that
a record appears in a dataset (and a few other things). Certificate transparency uses
cryptographically verified append-only logs and Merkle trees to check the validity
of TLS/SSL certificates [58, 59]; it avoids needing a consensus protocol by having a
single leader per log.
Integrity-checking and auditing algorithms, like those of certificate transparency and
distributed ledgers, might become more widely used in data systems in general in
the future. Some work will be needed to make them as scalable as systems without
cryptographic auditing and to keep the performance penalty as low as possible, but
they are nevertheless interesting.
